Okay,
uh,
commissioner,
um, welcome everyone, um, welcome to the New Zealand Police.
Uh, we've got three hours with you, commissioner, and your team.
It's a long time. Um, we have a structured agenda, so I'm going to
try and keep us within that structure. You'll have it.
Um, and I would ask, as we get questions and different people
t- have to answer them, please just feel free to come up and
speak into the microphone because it makes it so much easier for- for us to
hear, uh, some of the answers. So, on that note, Commissioner,
apparently you've got six minutes.
(laughs)
Right. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, look, uh, can I firstly introduce,
introduce my colleagues beside me?
Andrea Connell, chief operating officer, acting Deputy Commissioner Jill Rogers,
and acting deputy, Deputy Commissioner Tasha Penny.
Thanks for the opportunity today.
Um,
can I just acknowledge, firstly, all of the committee members here with us and the
rest of my team and, and other people here in the room?
Um, the last time I was here at the annual review was five days into my time
as the commissioner of police. Well, it's been a big year, frankly.
Um, it started in the worst possible way with the loss of,
uh, Lyn Fleming on the 1st of January, and it's been pretty tough,
frankly, uh, ever since. But, um, I'm very, very proud of the team that I have
supporting me, uh, my colleagues across the country, uh, and I thank,
uh, not only them for the work they do at the front line, but also, um, the
public of New Zealand and everybody in this room because everybody does
appreciate that policing isn't easy.
And we've had our challenges, not only obviously starting so, so sadly
with the loss of Lyn, but many other things that we've had to navigate through the
year. Uh, and most recently, of course, the IPCA report.
That gives us plenty to think about, uh, moving forward.
So, um, uh, there's a lot to be very, very proud of though,
and as the commissioner of police, I am very, very proud of the results that we
have seen over the last 12 months in terms of policing gangs.
I think about the 500 and how hard we have worked, um, to
achieve that target, uh, as early as we can, but making sure we recruit the right
people into New Zealand Police for our country.
I think about the differences that we have made, uh, in retail
crime, uh, and, and many, many other things.
Uh, government targets, youth violence, um,
uh, the infl- the impact that we've had with our increase in beat
patrols. Um, certainly the expectations that I outlined on day
one as the commissioner, um, have proven to be the right things and they will
remain firmly our priorities moving forward.
Um, we certainly have a lot to, to think about in 2026.
Um, I'm looking very, very forward to, uh, having a new leadership
team, uh, supporting me help steer New Zealand Police and the
colleagues, uh, across the country who do an outstanding job day and
night. Um, amongst, uh, a number of the things that we need to
think about, and I know it's first on the agenda, is of course the audit report,
and I welcome the, uh, areas of focus there, whether that's contract management,
asset management, procurement, um, or the
breach of appropriation that we had in road policing.
Those four things in particular, um, we, uh, are already working
hard to be better at. Um, uh, of course, uh,
given the events of this year, trust and confidence is, is an absolute priority for
me. I said that on day one, nothing has changed. That matters.
We've taken some hits and we will make sure we move forward and, uh, do our
absolute best for our country. Uh, amongst other things for
2026, um, I've been clear, uh, with my executives
that, um, those four priorities I articulated here a year ago
remain. That is focus on core policing, supporting the front
line, uh, leadership, and our role, uh, being
connected to the front line, um, our visibility, and of course, our
accountability under leadership are as important, if not more so
than they were 12 months ago. And of course, our fiscal
responsibility, ensuring that New Zealand Police...
uh, the New Zealand public can have confidence in New Zealand Police in terms of
vote police and our little over $3 billion that we have to deliver services to the
country. Um, I, uh, through the year, I have
also outlined three particular goals, which are fairly simple.
Uh, s- service, safety, and trust.
Those three things matter to all New Zealanders and they matter to us, uh, in
policing as a result of expectations.
I have also, um, started early work on putting in place some of our
own internal targets that, uh, I want out my organization, uh, to
aspire to, which will, uh, drive, uh, behaviors.
Uh, and those targets are 80%, uh, trust and confidence.
Uh, we've been there before. There's no reason we can't do it again.
Um, uh, we have seen some small incremental increases.
We've taken some hits on trust and confidence, um, particularly recently, but
I want to set an expectation that we, um, achieve 80%.
And that will take time, but we'll work really hard towards it.
Another, um, another target that I want to put in place for the organization is
80%, um, satisfaction for the services that we
deliver. We're currently sitting at about 71%, so we've got some work to
do there too, but I know that we can do it.
Uh, and also, uh, 15%, uh, increase in resolutions
for retail crime in particular. We have seen incredible work across the country t-
addressing retail crime. Uh, and I want that to continue.
Um, and then a 15% reduction in public place
violence. So, uh, that's, uh, particularly important in CBDs across New
Zealand. Uh, and that in particular drives behavior for beat patrols
and visibility of police. Many initiatives, uh, um,
underway across the organization to help us be, uh, our absolute best for the
country. Uh, one of the things that I have, um, particularly focused
on more recently is, uh, a thing called, called Frontline Service Model.
And that is that we have over 600 sworn staff who aren't in
necessarily frontline roles, uh, and creating expectations for them to
also get out and make a contribution to policing on the front line.
Increases our presence across the country.
Um-Lots of things to be thinking about.
Uh, I know that we can get there. It's been a tough year, but I, I, I think and,
and I welcome questions from the committee, um, uh, uh, one of the, one of
the final points that I'm, I'm very, very proud of is that if I look at
the, uh, diversity that we have brought into New Zealand Police over the last five
years, in particular, um, Maori communities, our Pacific
communities and ethni- ethnic communities, if I think about Maori communities in
particular over the last five years, we've had a 20% increase in Maori colleagues
in New Zealand Police and I think that's a success story.
And I said in this very place a year ago that that matters, and it's the
responsibility of all members of, uh, New Zealand Police, uh, in
particular the leadership, it's a value that we all subscribe to that we
find better ways to achieve outcomes for all communities across New Zealand.
So thanks, uh, thanks for everyone's time today and I welcome
questions.
Thank you, uh, Commissioner, and I acknowledge the work of the police.
I should say that at the outset. Right.
First question from, uh, Honorable Trinny Anderson.
Thank you very much, uh, thank you Commissioner.
What work is being carried out by police to mitigate the cost pressures and deliver
the 500 new police?
Uh, well, we, um, certainly started a year ago, um, uh,
with a lot of our cost-saving initiatives.
In fact, even, uh, one of the first things I did was a na- a restructure of the
executive to trim down and slim down and actually re-identify opportunities to
reinvest. Um, that, uh, I've been very
clear that with the initiatives that we've rolled out over the last 12 months, that
that doesn't impact on the front line.
Front line is New Zealand Police and my job, along with my executive is
to, is to support them. So we've, uh, we've had a very close look
at the opportunities to not only save but also to reinvest and I'm particularly
proud of where we, uh, have made savings, in particular contractors and
consultants, uh, with a saving of r- um, close to $90 million over the
last, um, uh, a little over a year. Um, those are all
opportunities to reinvest. So we're, we're looking really, really hard, um,
we're... It's one of our priorities, fiscal responsibility.
And, and when will the 500 be delivered?
Um, as soon as possible. I did say, of course, a year ago
that, um, uh, we were working really hard to reach the
500 but that I wasn't prepared to compromise, um, on the, uh,
caliber of New Zealand Police officer.
Um, uh, this year if... to give you a couple of statistics,
we... over the last 12 months, we've had over...
actually close to 9,000 applications.
Uh, the 12 months prior to that was a little over 5,000.
Um, this year we will have, a- as Christmas approaches, nearly, uh,
have, um, signed on another 900 staff.
That's about 800 brand new recruits and about close to 100
rejoins.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, we've never achieved that many in a 12-month period and we've worked incredibly
hard to, um, to promote New Z- uh, policing, uh, in
New Zealand as a career and e- even with some of our colleagues who have gone
across to Australia, we've had some big successes with them coming home.
So working really, really hard, um, I'm hopeful that we'll get
there, uh, as, as early as possible in 2026 but I...
as I've, as I've always said, I, I, I'm not about to compromise on the
standards, uh, of the, uh,
So, um, so from the calculations, the p- police to population
ratio ha- has, has dropped over the course of this government.
There was funding in place for one police officer to every
480 New Zealanders. That's now changed to around one police
officer to every 510 New Zealanders.
Do you, do you have any particular explanation for that increase given your
focus on increased police visibility?
Yeah, look, I think this, this, this week, uh, 10,451
sworn staff, uh, in a couple of weeks' time we'll have another, uh, 80
graduate and few, um, a month after that and, and 91
we've got a target of 500. What I'm focused on is making sure
that we achieve the 500 target but alongside that as I spoke
about is an in- is an initiative to ensure that sworn staff, whatever
their role in New Zealand Police, particularly those that aren't, uh, front line as
a core function, but they also get out and make a contribution.
So I'm drawing on all the levers that I can internally to ensure that we, uh,
we do our best and, and visibility does matter and over 600
staff that are sworn but non-front line, uh, all have a contribution
to make just like I do and I'll be out there as a policeman doing my bit
Do you intend to restore that one to 480 ratio that was
previously funded?
Uh, that, well, that's, that's not so much a decision for me.
W- what is for me is to ensure that I, um, uh,
we, we work really, really hard to recruit that 500 and ma- and
optimize the, the total actual strength of New Zealand Police officers.
That's what I've got to focus on because-
... w- we can have-
Just one last thing.
... we can have statistics about, you know, ratios and things like that but I, I've
got to take what's in front of me and that is 500 new staff and making sure that my
existing staff are all making a contribution.
The, um, the annual report indicates there's been a decline in general
public who agree that police are effectively responding to
crime. Uh, do you think that has a correlation to the
drop in the police to population ratio?
Sorry, say that again, sorry?
So in your annual report, there's been a decline when people are asked, the general
public, "Do you agree that police are effectively responding to serious
crime?"
That's dropped in your annual report over the past couple of years.
Right.
Do you think there's a link between that decrease and the fact that
there are fewer police per other peop- per population
in New
Zealand? Yeah, well it's i- it's interesting, a lot of the feedback that I've had throughout
the year given our emphasis on beat patrols and visibility is that in fact
pretty much across all communities the feedback I'm getting is that we see a lot
more police out there, uh, whether that's on the roads or on the beat.
So
th- uh, that's my experience, uh, and certainly that's the experience that I'm
drawing from members of the public that tell me, putting aside
ratios. In terms of our responsiveness, uh, I mean, that is
directly related to the priorities that I've set about being a responsive police
service, um, service being one of our goals.
So we will
w- we will work incredibly hard to provide the best possible service, uh, ac-
across all the demands that police has to manage.
Okay. We're gonna take two more sups and then we'll move on to a new question.
Uh, Mr. Bates.
Thanks, Chair. Just going back, Commissioner, to your comment regarding the number
of rejoins from Australia.
Mm-hmm.
What is driving those officers coming home?
And what more are you doing to bring more of those-
Yeah. ... officers back to New Zealand?
Yeah. Thank you, good question. I, um, have spoken to many of
those who either have returned to New Zealand or intend to return to
New Zealand, and, uh, in a, in a way, it actually happened by accident when I was
over there and I spoke to some that had, had decided to go to
Australia. Um, the common theme from
pretty much all of them, and as most recently as Sunday night when I spoke to one
who is currently with Queensland Police but wants to return, um, in
the next few months-
Right.
... is that, yes, while financially it may be a different story to tell,
um, when, when you go and experience policing in a different
place, you see, uh, what it can be like,
um, when you think about the tools that some do or don't have,
as the case may be in Australia, to help them police, uh, the
camaraderie, um, the emphasis that's placed on
working with all communities, in particular for our country, the pride that we
have in working with Maori. Um,
there's a whole host of reasons, and those are just a selection
of some of the, uh, responses that I do get.
But it's fairly consistent when I ask the why, as to why they wanna come
home. And having, uh, been offshore myself, and I
just returned on Sunday night from, uh, Morocco where I attended
the Interpol's General Assembly, uh, the biggest event for police
chiefs around the world, um, oh, I'm constantly reminded
of how lucky we are to live in New Zealand, to be Kiwis, and for me as
a policeman, uh, alongside 15,000 colleagues who do a, an
incredibly, um, good job. Actually, when you see it outside your own
country, you realize how lucky we are.
So those are the common themes that I hear wherever I go and whoever I speak
to.
Great. And, uh, just a second sup regarding the
measures that the member was just referring to that were tracking down
from 2020, uh, 78, 77%
for those two references for people's feeling of crime-
(clears throat)
... coming down to 71, 73
when, when the government became the government, stabilizing.
What's your forecast for those, um, indicators over the
coming year?
In terms of our response?
In terms of the percentage of people who agree or strongly agree that police that
deal effectively with serious crime-
Yeah.
... and the second one's most harmful, both of those tracking down from the
high 70s-
Yeah.
... uh, 2020, to 71, 73-
... when we became the government.
Yes. Yeah, well-
That in mind, what's your forecast?
So, forec- hard to predict, uh, what the future might looks like-
Yeah.
... other than to be able to talk to the priorities that I've set, the importance
of trust and confidence, our visibility in communities across the country, and
how hard we are working to be as present as possible and, and
respond to all the different demands on New Zealand Police.
So, uh, our intent is the right intent, and we hope that those,
um, statistics, um, get better.
Right. I'm going to Miss Paul. Uh, just remind members, audit,
we're talking about the audit here. Yep.
Sorry, Mr. Chair.
We're working through the structure-
Yep.
... moving this forward.
Yeah.
Um, kia ora, uh, Commissioner. My question is around,
um,
uh, your executive restructure and how that's going.
So I understand that that's a process that's happening at the moment, or-
Uh-
... where, where are we at with that?
Yes, look, I did a restructure, uh, very, uh, early on in my tenure where we
trimmed it down. I felt that it was too big, too bloated, too expensive, and not
delivering for the organization or New Zealand, so I trimmed down.
Um, and at the moment, uh, we are going through
processes to appoint, uh, new deputy commissioners
that will inevitably result in appointments at assistant commissioner level
and also district commander level.
So really in the top, um, three layers
of New Zealand Police, we are going through processes to put new leadership
in place, and I'm really looking forward to that-
Mm-hmm.
... and starting 2026 with a new team and
substantive people in, in positions.
Uh, I've managed through the year without that.
So basically about simplifying the executive
structure, is that-
Making it, certainly making it more lean, but not changing any of our
focus, uh, the things that we value. None of that is changing.
It's simply saying that where there are savings potentially to be
made, what do those look like, how can we achieve them, how can we reinvest
them?
(clears throat)
100% (whispers) . So, um, priorities don't change with, with a change in
structure. Um, uh, roles and responsibilities
change because then inevitably what it means is senior leaders pick up more because
there's less to pick up often the same workload, but we're up for
that. Um, our, our value set doesn't change.
Um, um, but, uh, having people in positions and
confirmed matters, and I'm, I'm looking forward to that.
Yeah, that's really helpful because obviously the executive structure is gonna
dictate how your operations work.
Um, I have, um, an OIA around the executive
restructure that, um, says that you're considering
disestablishing the deputy chief executive iwi and communities role
within the restructure. Is that something you're considering?
No, that, that happened a year ago. Yeah.
And why did you do that?
Uh, that was about trimming down the executive level.
As I've s- as I've said, it doesn't change the value set that we have.
In fact, um, if I think about that particular role, it places greater emphasis
on, uh, who is in the executive to, to deliver on expectations.
And, and, and one of our, um, core values is commitment to Maori and the treaty.
Um, we wear it on our shoulders every day. Um, I'm very passionate about that.
In fact, it's one of the things that, in my travels and work offshore, I think New
Zealand can be proud of.
(clears throat)
Doesn't, doesn't change the emphasis that we place on that and I...
And as I said in this room a year ago-...
um, you know, the work that we do with all communities across New Zealand,
particularly at a grassroots level, our, uh, iwi liaison
offices, our Maori responsiveness managers,
uh, across all our structures, both operationally and corporate, we all
subscribe to the same values. So, in the restructure that I did earlier
this year, uh, that position did g- get taken out along
with, um, a number of others at tier three as well.
Um, doesn't change the emphasis and expectation we put on each other to,
um, to step up.
So, that's picked back up through the iwi liaison offices, or is there a senior-
... person in your structure that is in charge of liaising with communities and
with iwi?
Well, we all are. I mean, whilst we have different roles and responsibilities, a
huge amount of my time as commissioner is spent engaging with
communities. I'm very lucky to have focus forums that provide good advice and
support to me.
Okay, um-
Uh, sorry.
I'm going to go to Mr. Ferris now. We're just talking about audit results, Mr.
Ferris. Um, your question, please.
Yeah, kia ora. Kia ora, Commissioner.
Um, hey, you've noted yourself and the OAG report noted that
trust and confidence is pretty much at an all-time low in the police.
It's down to 69%, hasn't been there since 2020.
Um, now, do you have, or what, what's the equivalent trust level amongst the
Maori, Maori community specifically?
Yeah, look, traditionally, um, trust and confidence across Maori communities
has been lower than that, and it's an area for us to, to work
on. Uh, 60%, in the 60s is the, is the figure lower than the ones
that you just, um, mentioned. Uh, that gives us,
uh, uh, lots to think about. Um, I'm very conscious of
that. But, you know, I do also know and acknowledge that many of the initiatives
that we've put in place across the organization, Te Paerenga being one of
those, are delivering, uh, results for Maori communities that we
can all actually be very, very proud of.
And, um, when, when I think about how we, how police
agencies around the world work with communities, I think New Zealand leads the way
globally.
Yeah, kia ora. Hey, look, six months ago at the last scrutiny, uh, discussion you
and I had, and the minister, you both dismissed the relevance of the
understanding police delivery report for Maori.
Um, given, you know, where we are currently and the recent revelations around the
conduct and attitude of the most senior police officers in the country,
um, and the connection to what Maori experience at the hands of
the police, do you think rejecting that report was a mistake?
Uh, it's not, it's not that we rejected the report.
What, what I did say was that-
Oh, I'm pretty, I'm pretty clear that you did reject the port, the report, both of
you-
Yeah.
... because it was the last executive's report, not your own.
No, look, what I did say that there are certainly some learnings in there for us,
and that's why the executive has gone through all 51 recommendations.
We've adopted 15 of them, we've put 29 of them, uh, on hold
while we, um, prioritize, uh, and we have rejected seven of them.
So, we've gone through-
Okay, but just given, given that low, um, given the low trust and confidence in the
Maori communities, what are your targets to improve that through the, uh, through
2026?
So, of the 15 we've adopted, and this will also apply to many of the 29,
we, we are blending that into Te Hiranga o te Tai, which you'll be
familiar with, and the three pou that matter there.
One of those is cultural competency, one of them is around partnerships, and the
other is about initiatives and making sure that we work together with
Maori to deliver better outcomes.
And I, and I know that as an organization, we can be very proud of how hard we've
worked in this space. And as I say, it's not just about bosses, uh,
particularly here in Wellington, it's about all staff who subscribe to the same
value set and, and, and the staff that we have at an operational
level, um, in Maori Pacific and Ethnic Services.
Collectively, we actually are, are working very, very hard and that isn't gonna
change one bit.
Okay, thank you for-
Hey, just last, just lastly,
Mr. Ferris. Mr. Ferris.
... the OAG, the OAG report-
Mr. Ferris.
Yeah, this last, last sup on this one.
Um, we've... This is the last sup, but I'm gonna remind you that we have a section
on Maori, uh, partnerships later at, on, and I just wanna
make sure we could k- keep this on the agenda. So last sup, please.
Yeah, yep, yep. Yep, yep, thanks for that.
Um, okay, so the OAG also found that there was weak outcome reporting
for Maori initiatives. Uh, h- how are you gonna bolster the
activity by having clear targets for police?
(clears throat)
Uh, clear targets for police?
Or specifically to Maori?
Yeah, the, the OAG report found weak outcome reporting around Maori
achievement or advancement.
Right,
So, weak outcome reporting for Maori. So, how are you gonna fix that?
I, I think we need to celebrate successes better and that's certainly something
that in the new year we need to look at, because the results are there.
Uh, if I think about the high percentage of non-reoffending rate in
Te, uh, Te Paerenga as one example, the fact that we've got 12
Rangatahi, uh, TPOs, uh, opportunities across the
country. We've got 30 for, for adults.
It's all there, perhaps we just don't celebrate it enough.
Because if I, uh, think about the progress that we've made in, as an organization
over 30 years in particular, we can't dismiss how much hard work's been put into
this, and that won't be changing under my leadership.
Right. Now, we're gonna move on to organizational health, and the first one's
strategic direction. I'm gonna come back to you, so hopefully you can weave your
question into this. We're gonna start with Honorable Ginny Anderson.
Thank you, Andrew. Uh, Commissioner, do you think that there is a problem with
police culture?
No, I don't. Um, what we have seen in the last 12 months is some,
some events, uh, particularly recently with the IPCA
report, which relates to, uh, conduct of, uh, largely
former members of the most, at the most senior level.
And we've had some other, um, experiences that we've identified,
um, through either own, our own audits and checking processes, whether
that's breath testing devices or it's access to inappropriate
material. Though, those two, two, two last, um, situations in
particular are as consequence of the decisions that
me and my executive have made to, to have a closer look.
Um, that, uh, is very disappointing.
Um, that doesn't mean that the entire organization should be branded in
a way that's unfair, because it's not....
uh, what anyone, uh, deserves. Th- those that do, uh,
fall below expectations, um, my expectation is that we act
on that and we, we deal with them. Um, and I'm confident that
albeit hugely disappointing, um, uh, it's a
reminder to all staff that, uh, expectations are there and
we'll act on anything that falls below standards.
The IPCA have been very clear that they do believe there is a problem
with police culture. Are you taking the position that the IPCA is
incorrect in that assessment?
No. I've taken on board already all the recommendations.
But I think what, what I'm saying is that would be h- would be grossly unfair
to, to reflect on 15,000 men and women who do a tough job and a very
good job across the country day and night. That, that's what I'm saying.
It's, it's, it ... but there, if there are things, uh, that have been
identified, and the IPCA report certainly did within that, the cohort of
people that were subject to part, to that investigation certainly identified an
issue. Um, and I've taken all of those recommendations on board.
My team, we've put together a plan that, um, we're prioritizing in
terms of effort. We've got many things underway and we've got additional things
underway, such as the performance improvement review that I, I'm working with
Public Service Commission on to identify other areas of opportunity, whether that's
integrity or culture or conduct. So, we, we are certainly working very, very
hard to, um, to correct behaviors that fall short of
expectations, not just for me as the Commissioner of Police, but for all New
Zealanders, frankly.
So just to be clear, the, the IPCA specifically said that after the Basley
report there were some, um, improvements made but there was still
much more to be done-
Yeah.
... for police culture in general.
Are you saying that you don't think-
No.
... that that applies?
Yeah. I wouldn't be accepting all the recommendations if I didn't agree with them,
so there are certainly pockets of opportunity and that's why, that's why we're
doing what we're doing, whether it's, uh, the auditing processes to identify those
pockets and so that gives us the opportunity to act on.
But the vast majority of police, um, uh, turn up
do
a, a, a fantastic job and it's, uh, it's expected that we would deal with anything
that falls short and that's, that's exactly what we're doing.
Did you consider having one of your new deputies as non-constabulary as
there was post the Basley inquiry? Uh, I think the precedent was Lyn Provo.
Yeah. That's ... We are, we're working through some options.
That's the sorts of things. I mean that, that, that's, um ...
You know, there's all sorts of things on the table but, you know, I'm looking
forward to having a new leadership team in place.
There are very, very capable, um, experienced and high
caliber, uh, colleagues that are ready to step up.
We've just gotta let processes take their course.
What changes have you made, uh, to police or how have you
changed police culture, uh, during the
2024/'25 financial year?
Uh, well, set expectations from the outset and I've, I've
done quite a bit of that this year, um, whether that's, uh, involving the police
college or it's involving things like retail crime or it's, um,
outlining those four priorities that I've spoken about, if it's the
goals, service, safety, trust. Like there's many different artifacts
or conversations that I can point to, many of which I have led,
uh, that have reinforced what I expect, uh, of my organization and the people in
it.
Sorry. Last one, sorry. And the process to appoint the new deputy commissioners,
is that different to ones that have been run in the past or the same process?
No. Look, I th- well, I mean, I ... The current process that's underway is not
led by me. That's led by the Public Service Commission.
Um, but the work that's going in to ensure that all the right
probity, integrity and all those other checks that New Zealanders would expect
when you're appointing, um, people at the most senior level of the organization,
that is very, uh, intense, uh, and it needs to be.
So that's the difference.
And do you think-
Uh, no, wait. No, no, no. We've got one supplementary from Mr. Rutherford.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. In, in light of the line of questioning from the member, is
it fair to say that part of your role and responsibility is to flush out what
effectively were the bad eggs-
Yes.
... and it's unfair to tar everybody in the police-
... organization with the same brush?
Yes. Correct. Um, you know, I've spoken to a lot of my staff throughout the entire
year and, um, uh, whether you describe it as anger
or just being let down, the behaviors of a small number, um, it's unfair
to, for that to reflect on
15,000 people who do an outstanding job for our country.
Yeah. Thank you.
Yeah.
Okay. I'm going to Mr. Waititi.
Thank you very much. And, and just on the, um, the, the back end of,
uh, (foreign language) to you, uh, Commissioner, and welcome
to you, um, around police culture, and I just want to touch on
the understanding of policing delivery report.
Mm-hmm.
Um, in the 2024/2025 annual report provides extensive performance
tables but does not clearly set out how police are measuring and reducing
disproportionate impacts on Maori at key decision
s- points, um, stops to arrests-
Yeah.
... use of force, charging decisions.
What recommendations from understanding policing delivery have been accepted,
partially accepted or rejected, and why?
Yeah. Okay. Look. I'll, I'm gonna call on, um, Acting Assistant Commissioner Urai
Wakaururu who has particular focus on a daily basis on these,
this level of detail. But while, uh, UV comes here, look, as I,
as I have said, um, Sir, the, um,
executive has considered all 51 recommendations.
We have adopted 15 of them, uh, released an implementation.
There is 29 there were on hold because we do need to prioritize,
um, and seven that we, that we, uh, have rejected.
But they all must fall withun, withu- under the three
(foreign language) which is our cultural
competence, uh, it's about the strength of our partnerships,
a- and it's about the, uh, role of Maori in helping shape initiatives
for our organization. That (foreign language) has been with us for a few, for
a few years. Um, it has delivered, uh, good
results, (foreign language) as part of that.
Mm-hmm.
So-... the, the things that we have adopted so
far, um, of those 51 recommendations are falling
into the rewrite of Te Huringa o te Tai.
And that's, that's something that I've also spoken at my Maori Focus Forum about.
But I'll just turn-
Do you have any timeframes for when those will be implemented?
Just-
Oh, no, they're all... Well, I'll come to you-
Okay.
... you actually but
already now.
Let's hear from-
(speaks in Maori)
. Warm Pacific
greetings. Um, so as the commissioner said, uh, 15
recommendations have identified, been identified out of, um, the
UPD. Um, we're now going to, um,
incorporate a number of those into Te Huringa o te Tai, the refresh.
Uh, some of th- some of it, um, is going to re- reflect directly
in terms of how we, um, grow through the Maori leadership
in, in the, in the organization. We're also, um, working towards
some of the key themes, um, that came out of the UPD
regarding use of force and at the OAG level, and the recommendations that came
out of that group. Um, what we're also looking to do is
ensure that those recs are incorporated across the
organization. So, uh, with the commissioner's work plan at
tier three or at AC, assistant commissioner and, uh, superintendent level
across the 12 woman districts, ensuring that, um,
those recommendations are delivered, um, starting next
year. Uh, in terms of, um, the monitoring of that,
um,
the, uh, commissioner's Maori Focus Forum is an external,
uh, partner that, uh, will be able to be provided updates quarterly
in terms of that, and some prominent iwi leaders that sit on that.
Also, with, um, the, uh,
advisory... Um, sorry, the assurance, uh,
ARKS is the, um, is, is another external,
um, organization that our sh- our assurance group also has that can
also monitor the recommendations as they roll out next year.
What cultural capability training and anti-racism training is in place for new,
existing staff as a result of that report?
So I've heard what you're-
Yep.
... at different tiers, but actually is, is there an implementation at training-
Sure.
... and across all the staff that are-
Yes.
... that are already part of the police?
So at, uh, RNZPC, um, assistant
comm-
Can you, can
Sorry? At the Royal New Zealand Police-
Oh, yeah, yeah. Sorry, sorry.
Uh, deputy commissioner deployment, um, is now, um, working
through, uh, the refresh of a national training program that will
involve, um, initiatives like, um, wai
visits. Uh, we have online, um, uh, training
for an understanding of, uh, what culturally responsive to, to
Maori, uh, needs to look like. Um, also,
um, putting that across ethnic and Pasifika as
well. Uh, some of our senior courses, uh, we're going to
really, uh, look at, uh, wall, the wall walk, which is what we, uh,
introduced to, um, the organization a few years ago under our previous
commissioner, and a, a few other, uh, of those, um,
initiatives that we can actually not just, uh, run out of, uh, Royal New Zealand
Police College, but also regionally.
Just, just-
Yeah. Oh, sorry.
Oh, sorry.
I'll just add one more thing. I thi- I think we also need to acknowledge, uh, the
effort over decades, 30 years actually, uh, that New Zealand police has
put into, uh, work with all communities, particularly Maoris.
Because, you know, even when I went through as a, as a recruit in 1996, and I
compare my own experience to where we are now, uh, you've only got to go
to a graduation to realize how hard we work to acknowledge
culture, um, and how proud we are of that.
And, and, and, and, Uri has talked about the commissioner's work plan.
Yes.
So, under the four priorities that I articulated at the beginning-
Mm-hmm.
... um, the first one being focus on core policing, one of the deliverables that I
set for the organization earlier this year was our
focus on the work that we do with Maori Pacific and ethnic
communities, and in particular, how that translates, whether it's at the highest
levels of the organ- organization or, or the operational level across
districts. It's on my work plan for our organization because it
matters. It is core policing, and-
Yeah. ... that's we... That's an area-
Just very quickly-
Go ahead,
Dennis. ... one more, just one more. Te Huringa o te Tai overreaching strategy-
That's interesting.
... strengthening its relationships with Maori-
Mm-hmm.
... um, has gone through a refresh.
I just wanted to, to understand the police leadership that will drive this,
given the retirement of Wally Haumahae-
Yeah.
... and, and Pieri, uh, is no longer working with you guys.
I just wanted to know how, how do you intend-
Mm-hmm.
... to lead this strategy, uh, and improve Maori trust and confidence?
Yeah. Our, our effort and our focus never ever comes down to one or
two people.
It's all of our responsibilities.
We proudly wear the relationship on our shoulders every day.
I, I'm, I'm not going to fall into the trap of thinking that the
expectation that my organization wraps around the pri- this priority comes down to
one or two people. It's all of ours. And, and it starts with me, frankly.
So, um-
(laughs)
... so we, we will-
I think you need
pass up.
... you know, through-
Yeah,
pass up. ... once I get a, a confirmed leadership team in place, you know, we'll go through
a process of resetting, um, a whole lot of expectations.
Those are already very clear. But, um, we've all got a key role to
play in terms of, um, our commitment. Um, it's the same for all of us.
Doesn't matter whether you're the commissioner or the...
you're the newest recruit that is about to graduate.
Um, it's the same for all of us, and we've got to be...
We've got to be proud of that, I think.
I look forward to that.
Right.
(laughs)
Okay. We're gonna have one more sup, but I keep reminding members- Yeah.
we've got time to set aside for later-
(clears throat)
... tuning into other stuff. Right. One sup here, and then I'm going to Mr.
Stevenson.
So, just on the line around Maori and policing and,
um, issues of systemic bias or systemic racism that exists
within the police,
are you now saying that you accept that there is systemic
racism within the police?
No.
And if not... 'Cause a lot of your comments this morning, you've been saying you
can't paint 15,000 officers with the same brush.
Yeah.
Systemic bias and racism is not saying every police officer
is racist.
Yeah.
It's saying that the structures and the rules...
For example, the use of discretion, look at the way that that is used between
Pakeha and Maori cannabis possession-
Mm-hmm.
... charges.... it is disproportionate.
Māori, in the last year, are now more highly
charged with possession of cannabis than Pākehā-
Mm-hmm.
... despite the fact that we are only 15% of the population and Pākehā-
Right,
uh- ... are the majority.
Yeah.
So how does that work out?
Yeah, I-
How is there such a massive difference in the discharging of discretion, if not
systemic racism?
I would want to understand beyond just those high-level statistics, understand the
situations that my staff are dealing with and why that
is, you know, th- what you're explaining
there. I, I, it's too simplistic to sort of say that, "Oh, well, that must
equate to meaning this."
But it does-
I don't think
that's fair. ... correlate with police being granted more discretion on cannabis-
Mm. ... convictions and possession-
Mm.
... directly correlates with Māori being more highly convicted-
Yeah,
I'd lo- Yeah, sure. But- ... despite the population differences.
But, but I think we'd need to have a closer look at the circumstances, the
situations that my staff are encountering once
But that's what the Understanding Policing-
Okay. ... Delivery Report-
It's...
Yeah. ... is all about.
Sure,
sure. Is showing you
the evidence. Now, you've asked your, you've asked your question. Right. I'm going to Mr.
Simpson for a new line of questioning.
Yeah, just around-
And we should be now starting-
... um, our own strategic financial management. Is that okay?
Very good. That's exactly-
Thank you. I'm gonna tie-
(laughs)
... strategic financial management and actually an audit finding together, if
that's okay, Commissioner. Because-
(laughs)
... you did actually get a downgrade on your audit-
Give
us. ... around, um, management control environment from very good to good.
I'll miss you, Pamela.
Um, and I think some of the issues that were kind of identified, um,
yeah, were around... And I think you mentioned this actually, Commissioner, in your
opening, around asset, um, management, contract management,
procurement.
So I'm very keen to understand, uh, what's your plan to kind of, I
suppose, invest in some of those corporate functions-
Yeah.
... um, around kind of finance, procurement, risk management,
asset management, et cetera?
Yeah. Sure. You've got-
'Cause obviously you want to improve that-
Yeah. ... I'm assuming.
Yes. I, I welcome a new report, obviously, uh, new
auditor, you know, um, a reset for us.
Uh, asset management, uh, has been something that the police, uh,
have not done well for a very long time.
Um, uh,
I'm going to hand to Andrea, uh, on my right, just to explain a little bit about
the work that we're already doing to ensure that in the next 12 months, we can
demonstrate better effort and better results.
Would you like the-
Thank you. Uh, you're right. So we did receive a downgrade from very good to good
in one aspect of our latest, uh, audit report.
Uh, some of those key findings, as you've highlighted, around asset management,
procurement, and contract management.
Uh, asset management, in particular, is an area we know that we have quite low
maturity in, and we've been utilizing, um, various
industry-standard frameworks to assess ourselves against that.
We are also, uh, quite harsh on ourselves when we monitor ourselves
against the Cabinet Office circular, and so had only, uh, marked ourselves
compliant two out of seven in our previous attestation.
We've put a lot of effort into that over the last year, and at our next
attestation, we'll be, uh, more compliant in areas, uh, than we
had been in the previous one. Uh, particularly, as you appreciate, police
has a large asset base that we need to do that across, so we have a very large
property portfolio, we have thousands of operational assets,
um, and we have quite a large technology stack as well.
And so applying that across all of those areas, we're obviously looking for full
compliance across all of our asset management.
Um, it is an area we're focusing on, and particularly in our property space
with our Property Long-Term Network Investment Plan and our 20-year property
strategy.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, so while I'm quite pleased we've made quite a lot of proce- quite a lot of
improvement, uh, in asset management, we still won't be fully compliant.
Um, we won't turn around from two out of seven to full compliance in a year, uh,
but we have made quite significant improvement.
In terms of procurement and contract management, we have a
centralized register that is fed into...
It is quite manual in terms of how we maintain our compliance and
our adherence to that. Uh, but we do have a Procurement Assurance Board that
is across all of our procurement processes and adherence to the government
standards. Um, and at the moment, we are working through
our Enterprise Resource Management, so our ERM, system
upgrade. Our phase one is in workforce management and
HR, but our phase two starts to look into our financial systems.
Uh, and if we go into phase three, that also starts to look into our procurement
and contract management. So we have plans to improve our
manual systems, uh, and then we also have plans more in the long term where we
might be able to systemize more through further upgrade.
Just one quick supplementary.
I think one of the other things that, um, contributed to that downgrade was
this, um, th- this unappropriated expenditure
in relation to the road safety program was some, just a bit over $5
million. Again, just what have you done to kind of ensure that
doesn't happen again? What processes have you put in place, et cetera?
Sure. So, uh, we did breach the road policing appropriation by
less than 2% at the end of last financial year.
Uh, there were a couple of key contributors to that.
Um, one was the settlement of our employee bans, B to
J, which had been in negotiations at the, sort of
near the end of the financial year.
Uh, and part of that involved a lump sum settlement, uh,
payment to people that was paid in June.
So part of that was sort of unforecastable, uh, and did,
was a contributing factor. Another aspect was that we
had, uh, put quite a lot of effort into doing some property
remediation, and all of our costs are, an element of it
is attributed to the road policing appropriation.
And so that uptick in property maintenance at the end of the
financial year, and the portion of that that was attributed to road policing,
also contributed to that. Um, so those are a couple, I guess, a couple of the key
aspects that caused, that contributed, not fully caused, the
appropriation breach in that area.
We are obviously monitoring all of our appropriation areas and all of
our lines very closely as we do through the financial year.
That comes and is reported to the executive team monthly.
Uh, and we also share those results through the Treasury.
So I'm comfortable that we are monitoring closely through this financial year
any tracking.
Right.
Thank you. I've got a, a supplementary-
Yeah. Just a quasi sub, and thank you very much for being here, um, and
thank you for allowing people in Takinini to feel much safer by your hard
work. Um, Commissioner, did you mention earlier
that, um,
uh, somewhere around $90 million less is being
spent on consultants and contractors?
Yes, I did. Yes, so a few years-
Did
you- ... ago now, I think probably three years ago, um, Andrea will correct
me, uh, if I'm wrong, but, um, yeah, that was upwards of
135 million. And, as far as I'm
concerned, that's far too high.
Mm-hmm.
Um, because that's a choice that New Zealand Police needs to make, and as I said
that we've, we have reduced that significantly by about
90 million. Uh, I've set a goal, if you like, if you can call it that, of
45 million. So, that's, there's the 90.
Um, at the moment-
Yeah.
... we're in the 50s, I think.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and yeah, we're tracking easily to the 45, so-
Yeah. So that's a huge difference-
Yep.
... and that creates
a- So, you, you, just to be clear, you're, you're trying to get the figure down to 45
million a year-
Correct.
... and at the moment you're at 50?
No.
No, actually it sounds like we're even closer now to the 45.
Oh yeah, right, oh, just to be clear.
But few years ago it was 135, so-
Yeah.
... that means we've got choices to put into policing, uh, more directly, and, and
I'm proud of that.
Look, that sounds like a pretty sweet deal to me.
I've put some chocolate there for you.
(laughs)
Right, are you done? Right, um-
Thank you.
... new line of questioning from, uh, Ms. Anderson.
Thank you. I've got a question in relation to finances, but I just had one other
that I didn't finish. I wanted to know that are you going to make public
your work program that will be responding to the IPCA
recommendations?
Yeah.
Uh, at all?
Absolutely.
Full transparency and nothing to hide.
We've put a, we've already got a plan, um, in place.
Uh, we've already made some good progress on a number of things.
There's, there's no secrets to any of that. Very happy to share that.
And, and do you think there needs to be an independent inquiry?
Oh, look, that's not for me. I mean, I, what I want to be able to demonstrate is
that we have made good progress on the
recommendations, uh, which we've accepted all of them.
Uh, I also welcome the announcement around an inspector general of
police. That's not unusual in policing globally, so we welcome that.
Anything at all that ensures that the situation that is,
uh, the focus of the IPCA report never happens again.
Okay, numbers members-
Um, you... Oh, oh, I have one more question. Um, I've got a couple actually.
Uh, you received one-off critical cost pressure funding of 120
million in '24, '25 budget, uh, to
enable frontline and operational delivery of police services.
Where exactly did that money go and, and what further funding is needed-
Yeah.
... in, in future years?
Yeah, so we've had, uh, I think four years actually, uh, 124
for consecutive years. Andrea, do you want to speak
to that? Sure. So you're right, in, uh, Budget '24 we received the 120 million
as a one-off. In Budget '25 that was made permanent
into our baseline. Um, that was to address our baseline cost
pressures, so that is a mix of historical
remuneration, uh, property leases, rates, ICT
cost escalations. So that has gone into basically just
address the baseline cost pressures that we have in terms of supporting the front
line.
Okay, last one.
I've got one more question. So there's quite a significant cut in
corporate, um, in the previous budget.
I think it was about 19 million reduction in corporate
services.
Mm-hmm.
One of the key findings both by the Auditor General and by the Treasury
reporting is that there's been quite significant shortfallings in police
capability.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, do you have a plan in place to do that?
I can read out the Treasury report if you want me
to. No, no, I'll, I'll get Andrea to speak to what we're doing in that, um, space as
well. I mean, to, as I interpret that opportunity,
HR and f- finance functions, uh, are critically
important parts to support policing.
Um,
and, uh, over time we've
made changes to ensure that
that can be better. Um, be fair to say probably some of the choices that have been
made in the past haven't been ideal given, uh, the volumes and the bound
that we, um,
experience in both HR and finance.
Um, so look, we're trying to find the right settings, but I'll get Andrea to speak
to your question.
Okay, and, and if you could just speak to it, Treasury specifically stated-
Yeah.
... that funding had been put to the front line at the expense of actually doing
the core functions of corporate services-
Mm-hmm.
... which was preventing police to asset manage and do those basic jobs it
needed to do. Just any views-
Okay,
yep- ... on how you're going to address that risk?
... I'm sure you're very aware. Yep.
Yeah, sure. So, uh, we did have the corporate services budget
reduction in, uh, Budget '24.
Yep.
Uh, and I spoke here last year around our, um, restructure that resulted in
173 roles being disestablished, and, um, that included
vacancies where we could. Uh, we do have light teams,
uh, in our corporate functions, and we focus those on the areas where it,
where I're needed most. Uh, you've heard me reference around the audit report and
our asset management and our procurement uplift, and we are focusing on those
areas. Um, both our finance and our people services
spaces have also gone through operating model changes to make sure that we have the
right, uh, right capability with the capacity that we have
to support the work that needs done.
And, uh, on the Commissioner's work plan is a six-month review,
post that to ensure that we are delivering the services that we are needed to
do. Uh, and as you're aware, we're externally audited and monitored
on all of our compliance, so as always, any recommendation that we get
or any audit finding, we will prioritize and ensure that we,
uh, meet those expectations.
Okay. Mr. Ferris, I'm going to you. We're still on numbers.
Um, yeah, my question's across fiscal and, and back a little bit to
procurement. Um, so we know the OAG has r- reduced
the police control environment from very good to good, and the- these failures
signal, signal structural governance and fiscal discipline
risks.So, how many Māori providers or iwi partners sit
within the contracts that are affected by the weak contract management
downgrade?
Ooh. Goodness me. I, I think we'd have to come back to you with,
uh, actual numbers.
Okay. Well-
For this one this time. ... well, ask a dir- we can ask a direct question on that.
Yeah, that's all
right. Yep.
Yeah, yeah. Okay. So, what's the forecast impact?
Give- given that we've had a reduc- a, a reduction in the categorization of
performance, what's the forecast impact for Māori of the
downgrade?
Of Māori con- contractors, you mean?
Oh, no, no. Māori community at large.
Well, I'm not sure that we could make such a specific
correlation. Uh...
D- do you think we, do you think we need to sort of have the capacity to be able to
do that?
Sorry, say that again? You're breaking up a wee bit.
Uh, do you think that, that we need, that we should have the capacity
to be able to do that? Given the importance
of, um, police and the relationship with Māori and all
of the over-representation, things that we know occur and exist, do you think it's
important that we have that, um, degree of c- uh, capacity?
Well, as I've said a number of times, all communities
matter. Our, our focus is on delivering services for New Zealanders,
whether, irrespective of what specific
community you're saying. Yep, yep, yep. Yeah, um, um, um...
I wouldn't want us to get into a situation where we feel like our service
delivery is gonna be changing to communities just because of who they are.
I mean, I think that we take the approach that we've, where our
Well, look here, um, Commissioner, with all due respect, with all due respect, if
you take the Māori community as the most highly adversely
affected community, so with that in
light, and not on- not only that, but the, um, police's
obligations to uphold Te Tiriti o Waitangi, we're not just talking about
communities
Yeah.
... or communities. There are specific, um, commitments in the
Māori-Crown relationship, so how are we, how are we-
Okay.
... bringing those to the fore? What sort of capacity
Okay, this, this is our last question.
What, what's our priorities be? This is my line.
Well-
Come on.
Okay.
Well, the priorities that I've said, and I've said many times, the priorities
they've set are for all New Zealanders, all communities.
Um, that doesn't change depending on membership to a particular community at all.
We, we've got so much to be proud of, uh, in terms of how hard
we've worked in this space. I haven't seen a better mode- better model in
policing anywhere in the world.
Okay. Now we're gonna move on to core policing.
20 minutes on that. Right. Ginny?
Yeah, thank you very much.
Right. Ms. Anderson, or Honourable Ginny Anderson.
Thank you. Has seizing gang patches had an impact on the profits or the
harm being done by organized crime?
Sorry, could you repeat the question?
Uh, has the, the new legislation for seizing, um, gang patches
and also dispersing them-
Yes.
... has it sort of had a material impact on the profits they generate or the
harm they do in our communities?
Uh, over the last 12 months, um, if I can share some
statistics with you, we've seized, uh, over 170
patches, over 180 guns off gangs. We've
charged gang members, at least those that are on the national gang
list, over 15,000 charges. Um,
the feedback that I get from, uh, across the country is in terms of
our effort to police, um, gangs, uh, it's certainly
noticed. Um, compliance rates, uh, are high, albeit yes,
we have seized insignia of, uh, over 600 different
items. Look, I, I think that the results that we've seen, uh,
as a country over the last 12 months, and I do acknowledge gang members'
com- high compliance rates in this, I've said that before, in this environment,
um, I think actually it's, it's a real success story, uh, for our
country.
So as of June 8, 2025, there were
9,954 individuals on the gang list.
Uh, so that's a growth of about 800.
Yeah.
Um, are, are you concerned at all that the number of gang members
potentially could outstrip the number of police officers in New
Zealand?
Oh, look, I mean, I, I think over the years we've, we've often focused on a
list and have sort of thought that the list, um,
is where the buck stops. Actually, I, I don't think that most New
Zealanders think about a list. I think what they do think about is the
visibility of gangs in communities.
And frankly, the work that's been done over the last 12 months,
uh, is a success story.
Um, I just want to ask one on firearms, 'cause this covers all-
Yeah.
Sorry, follow on the gang?
Um-
Yeah, can I follow on the- Let's, uh... Yeah, I wanna just...
Just finish one, on the gangs.
Okay.
So, I'm gonna have there and there, right?
And here.
Mr. Bates first.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
And Ms. Lenks.
Yeah.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Commissioner, uh, I've heard from frontline police that
you've shown up, uh, during operations when you happen to be driving
through town, uh, and supported, just literally said, "What can I
do?" and helped out. In the case I heard about, you just took someone down to the
station 'cause that's what they needed from you.
How do you think that's impacted the morale of your officers across the
country, that they know that you're willing to get your hands dirty and
support the implementation of the gang
Well, thank... Yeah, no, thank you- patch ban? ... for raising that.
Um, at the end of the day, I might be the commissioner, but I'm still a policeman.
I can still do a job that, uh, and I wouldn't do, um, anything that I wouldn't
expect my frontline staff to do. But I'm not the only one.
I have a leadership team now who's committed to the same priority about being
visible. Um, uh, people alongside me and behind me know how
that, important that is. But the, certainly the feedback, uh, that I get across the
organization when leaders get out and amongst that frontline action, that does
matter and that's why it's a priority that I know only go from strength to
strength. Frankly, I, I joined New Zealand Police 30 years ago to be
the, be the best policeman I can. That hasn't changed.
That means I can still get my hands dirty.
Good. Thank you. Right. Um, Ms. uh, Paul?
Um, with the Gangs Act, um,
do you know, are you aware of how many dispersal orders or non-consorting orders
have been issued under the act? And with the
seizures of the patches and the two court rulings
that ordered police to return the patches-
Yeah.
... on what is, how do you justify using police's resources
to seize patches when the...... um, judiciary are
overturning-
Yeah.
... that act, and the other components of the act are not being used.
Yeah. So, uh, I can tell you that, as at today, there are
no, uh, non-consorting orders issued.
There have been three, uh, dispersal notices
issued, uh, and over
850 charges relating to gang insignia.
As you've correctly pointed out, uh, there have been a small number
who, that, uh, have had, uh, findings or decisions from the
judiciary. We've- we've ap- appealed those and they're currently working through a
process, um, so too early to comment on what those outcomes
might be.
W- would it make you reconsider maybe the future, um, enforcement of that
act if you know that there's this precedent for these kinds of
decisions and when there is a growing number of people who are going to
take the patch ban to the highest levels of court in this
country?
Oh, look, that's the process we have in our country and everybody's entitled to
subscribe to that, uh, whatever that means.
Uh, we've got a job to do in policing, um, we'll challenge decisions where we
feel that that's appropriate, that's exactly what we've done.
Uh, but I- I- I know that when it comes to the gang legislation and the results
over the last 12 months, um, the- the- the success story is,
um, the impact that that's had in communities around visibility and feelings of
safety.
Okay, I'm going to go to Mr. Waititi.
Now, we're just going to finish off gangs and then we're going to move to a new
topic.
I-
I thank you, um-
No, we'll go to new topic, yes.
... Mr. Chair, uh, Commissioner, um, I've
had, um, a few issues with that gang patch legislation in
my own particular area of Waiariki and in particular Opotiki
and Matapihi.
Mm-hmm.
And my concern when this, uh, came into force back in
2021, November 2024, was
the impact on the periphery of those, of those raids on-
on those particular communities.
And, um, gang patches in public
spaces, and I understand there was a tangihanga in Matapihi.
Yeah.
And a huge, um, presence of police there,
confronted by kuia, um, at the cemetery and things like that.
And you- you- you probably understand this.
Yes.
I had a conversation with the Minister of Police at that time.
Yeah, yeah.
Um, but also, um, in Opotiki, and
whether the... 'cause, uh, 'cause patches, guns-
Yeah.
... you know, you could mix them all up as you, as you, as you've done in this
report. Um, the patches may allow you to go in and have a look at other
things that, uh, if- if the people are committing crimes, then so be it.
My thing is, what have you learned from those particular raids,
like in Opotiki, or operations, whatever you want to call them,
um, and- and Matapihi, uh, where you can improve
the impact that it has on people on the periphery or those people who are not
involved in the gangs but are, but are impacted by the presence of them?
Okay, this question, this question-
Yeah, look, I... And I spoke to this last year, um, that event-
One minute's-
... that use, that tangi that you spoke about, um-
One minute, New Zealand's going to be nothing.
... you know, that was a learning opportunity for New Zealand Police.
Um, the kuia that spoke up, um, had a point.
Uh, we've taken that on board, we've learned from that and, um, I know that we're
better for it. And that, and that's the, that's the culture that I want to have in
my organization, that you learn from things when they perhaps don't go to plan.
Um, that was the first big event in the gang legislation where it
really tested us, and I think some decisions were made that could have been better.
So we factored that into, um,
uh, tangi ever since, um,
especially in particular to urupa and the proximity.
Um, but our job is to enforce the law.
And everybody's very clear on the gang legislation and, and the expectations, and
we'll take any opportunity given to us, to police, because that's what's expected
of us. Our job's law enforcement. Um, if I think about
Opotiki, yes, we... As an example, we've had a big operation there in the last
12 months focused on Muggle Mob Barbarian.
Uh, we've done that because it was necessary for that community.
And, and I do want to shout out the police staff who worked, and others in the
community, other community leaders who worked on that because actually that's what
the community was expecting of us, to deal with that particular gang who was having
a disproportionate amount of harm on the Opotiki
community. So that's our job and we'll keep doing it.
I- I get that, but what about the kuia that are getting their children ready for
school and those ones-
Oh, sure.
Yeah. ... it's the impact of the periphery-
Correct,
yes. ... that I'm, that I'm talking about.
Yeah.
What kind of planning and improvements have we, have you done-
... in that particular space?
Yeah, well that, that, I mean that particular event, as I say, we have debriefed,
we've learned from that. There were some decisions made that could have been
better. You know, that's- that's the culture that I want and, you know, make sure
that we don't have repeats like that.
Right, we're going to move on to a new topic, and I've got Mr. Arbuckle.
Uh, thank you, Commissioner. A couple years ago there was a real focus on
youth offending and I think every night we turned the news on, we would
see ram raids, uh, we would see events happening constantly.
I'm wondering with persistent offending, it's actually,
with youth it's actually reduced by nearly 15%.
What can you put that down to and what future tools do you need to
make sure that that reduction continues to reduce?
Good question. Uh, obviously it's government priority, target three around, um,
recidivist persistent youth offending.
Uh, there are a number of different initiatives that have contributed to
those results which are a success.
Um,
our job and our challenge is to keep it where it currently is.
We have seen a little bit of a spike in recent times in
Christchurch, um, which I'm happy to, my colleague Acting
Deputy Commissioner Tasha Penny to talk to in terms of what we're doing there.
So we, as an executive and every day we meet at eight o'clock and we
discuss the last 24 hours and we discuss the next 24 hours and where
issues of youth crime appear, we, uh, we, our
expectations are set around acting on that in a timely way because what we can't
afford is to return to where it was, the very situation that
you describe. Um, that's not good for
anybody. Uh, New Zealand Police is just one agency that's made a
massive contribution. FastTrack is one of those that we've done alongside
Oranga Tamariki. Um, as a country we need to keep......
that their families have gotta own up and do their bit too, when they've got young
people who are off doing other things.
Um,
and, uh, it's a huge team effort, but those results, uh, everybody
can be proud of. We just wanna keep it there.
If I, Mr. Chair, maybe we hear what's happening in Christchurch 'cause it's quite a
hot-
Hmm.
... topic at the moment, just what kind of sentence-
Yeah.
Um, good afternoon. So, like the commissioner said, uh, we do talk about this at
eight o'clock every morning. What we do is we look back every, um, 24
hours. Uh, we look for things like, uh, what crime and what
demographics. So, uh, firstly, this is a real inter-agency,
and it's far broader than an inter-agency, uh, issue.
We have to work with community on this.
And as the commissioner referred to, the Fast Track table, uh, for
predominantly 10 to 13-year-olds is one of those examples.
So in Christchurch at, at the moment, you know, we've noticed that there has been a
peak in youth offending, particularly in the last two weeks.
Um, uh, just an example of, of how we run our
operations, um, I'm in daily contact with the district
commander, Tony Hill down there. As of Monday, they've actually
established a operation that's to supplement the
specialist youth investigators and youth officers that we have
every single day. Um, and they are working
from an investigative, we're working with Oranga Tamariki and, in fact, uh,
myself and one of the assistant commissioners are actually going down later this
week to have conversations with Oranga Tamariki because we know that
we're heading into potentially a volume period, and we just have to work together.
But, but I can't underemphasize the working with community as well because
youth problem is not just a youth problem. It's, it can...
We need to work with whanau, we need to work with community if we're gonna make the
longer term change.
Okay, I'm gonna break this up. I'm gonna come back to Mr.
Rutherford, but we're gonna talk about youth crime, and I know that, um, Ms.
Anderson had one question.
I was just interested to know on, um,
how effective has the Fast Track or Circuit Breaker program
been? And, and, and specifically to Christchurch, is
that... I know there was intentions to have one. Is there one operating there?
And how's that going?
Um, I can talk to that one. The Fast Track program has been incredibly
successful. So, um, just bes- from a statistical point of view, um,
the 585 children that were referred last year, only 69% of them
ho- have been detected re-offending.
And of the older age group, the 14 to 17-year-old,
346 children have, young people have been through that with a, um,
81%, um, non-return of that. The
beauty of that program is it's required agencies to come together within
their first 24 hours to look at not just the youth that's been
apprehended, but the wider circumstances that's brought the responsibility and the
accountability on the whanau and on those partners that are going to support it
through. And then there has to be the plan in place within the 48 hours from
there. So that's been incredibly successful to see those y-
um, young people and children that have gone through the program that we've been
able to impact on, um, re-engaging them in education,
re-engaging them with health, um, support, all of those sorts of
services that help wrap round and prevent them from ending up in the justice
system.
Does police have a view whether that's an effective way in comparison to, say, um,
military style, um, academies or colloquially known as boot
camps?
Um, we certainly, uh, are s- are big supporters of the Fast Track program and
Kotahitikato was another initiative that's very similar that involves the
support. Um, I think we would just say that anything that encourages
engagement with education, proper housing, proper, um,
health cares met, and, um, support to a
whanau, um, we would be alongside to support as well,
because you can actually see from the results that we've had that you can impact on
a young person's trajectory.
And just to Christchurch as well, how's that given the spike we've just seen?
Is, is the Circuit Breaker program operating in Christchurch, and is it at
capacity?
I understand it is in Christchurch, but, um-
Um, Duncan, you're next. - ... yeah.
(clears throat)
Oh, so I understand it is working and like I said, that's why we're actually going
down to look at it 'cause the potential, uh, for Canterbury, if we're looking at...
And this is what the agencies, pro- particularly police are looking at.
We've got a really successful inter-agency model that has
ISR, that has been used for family harm for some years, that has been
evaluated several times with significan- um, significantly
successful outcomes, um, for whanau and community.
So, what we're looking at is, is there any possibility to look at those
tables, um, to even expand for youth.
But again, that is why we are constantly looking at this
issue, not just from police, because we know that, you know, we, we are not the
solution to this. We're looking where we've got inter-agency, where we've got
strong links into community and NGOs to always look for
potential. And so, that is what we're doing in Canterbury at the moment.
Right. Honorable Duncan Webb.
Yeah. Just, kind of, still on the capacity issue.
There's been some is- issues in Christchurch with young offenders,
young people who get in trouble, um, with them
being held in police cells, um, sometimes for up to
six days, at least on one occasion.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and this isn't unusual. Um, how
does... I mean, how can Fast Track alleviate that?
And what's the reason that police officers
are looking after these young people for
six, and in fact, in one case elsewhere, up to eight days-
Hmm.
... in police cells, holding cells?
Mm-hmm. Um, so obviously, that's not our ideal for young people to hold them in a
police cell. Um, so there's probably a number of variables to
that answer. The first thing is we need to get them before the
courts, uh, as applicable, uh, because it's the judicial system of where they're
placed. We also need to work heavily, and, um, every day
we have got a meeting where we are scanning and looking at how many young people
and where they are in custody, working with Oranga Tamariki, in
particular, to look at what placement and where we can get them.
Because I don't think you're gonna find anyone who says that we find
it acceptable to hold them there for that long.
Um, so this is something that we are triaging every day to look at, you
know, what sort of placements. You know, can they go to whanau?
Is there a remand home? Um, is there a, uh, a
secure area that they need to go and make sure that the full
information is put before the courts?
But just to give you an assurance, um, Dr.
Webb, is we are tracking that every 24 hours, and we are
looking at how long we are holding them for and working, in particular with
Oranga Tamariki, on that issue.
Because obviously, in terms of th- the Fast Track and putting supports
around people and getting them into-...
s- you know, services of all kinds.
Mm-hmm.
Um, you'd have to say that holding a young person in a police cell would be
pretty much the opposite and more likely to cause re-offending.
Hmm. I, I, I think we're in violent agreement on that issue.
The reality is that when we're doing an, an assessment and, and at times we
have to hold them, um, you know, there is the reality that
at times young people do need to be held in a police cell
until they are, are placed in an appropriate area for them to
go. But absolutely, um, we're not disagreeing, uh, with you that holding
a young person for c- circa six days is not okay.
And that is why we have a system and process where we are constantly,
every 24 hours, scanning and working with agencies about more
appropriate placements for them.
Okay. We're going to have the last couple of questions on-
Thank you.
... youth offending before we go to a new one from Mr. Rutherford.
Thank you, Mr. Chief. Um, now, the Office of the Privacy Commission,
uh, have ordered to the police to delete all, uh, the
photographs of- Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
... Rangatahi that were illegally taken.
However, due to funding constraints, the police have stated that they are unable to
do so until mid-2025 as they cannot afford to upgrade their
digital evidence database that may have changed, hence why the question.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
So, you were ordered to delete thousands of unlawfully obtained
photographs of Rangatahi Maori. What is the current status of
this? How many images were taken? And how many have been
deleted and will be, uh, uh, and will this be independently
verified?
Yeah. Look, good, this is a good question.
I, I have been working, uh, with, uh, our Privacy Commissioner
Michael Webster on this. Police have found it quite challenging to meet
those expectations. Um, uh, we're totally upfront and
honest, we continue to work really hard in this place, uh, in this space.
I can't give you actual numbers-
Please.
... off the top of my head, but we acknowledge that we haven't, um, got it in a
place where we would like it to be. Um, and that is why I, as the commissioner,
I've spoken with the Privacy Commissioner to see, you know, what we can do
to, to, to meet e- expectations as best as possible,
but are reasonable within the complexity of doing what's expected of us.
There's a delete button on the thing, you just go delete-
Yeah,
yeah. ... delete, delete.
(laughs)
Anyway. What changes have been made to police training and oversight to ensure
Rangatahi youth, uh, do not face improper surveillance
and are not photographed in the future?
So, there is the deletion of that by order, but I want to know what's
been put in place since-
... to ensure that that doesn't happen again?
Um, it's probably, uh, time for me to reflect on the changes to the solicitor
general guidelines that come into place on the 1st of January.
And that, um, will impact on the, um,
decisions that our officers make around charging, on, um,
arresting, those sorts of things.
And so, it, it has a new emphasis on,
um, community interest, interest in
circumstances of the individual at that time.
So, so that will change some of those things.
Um-
Are you saying it will allow the police to take photographs-
No.
... of Rangatahi? I, I just wanted-
... to hear, just wanted to know. So that, that, uh-
Yeah.
... police are... That change will ensure
tighter restrictions on being able to do that or not?
And more awareness of where the need is, when the community interest is, when
the public interest test is required for a charging decision.
So those changes come into place on the 1st of January.
And all of our staff are currently required to undergo the refreshed mandated
training on those.
Okay. Good. Thank you for that. We're now going to a new line of questioning
from Mr. Rutherford.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My question, initially to you, um, Commissioner,
is in your first year, now looking back, is New Zealand
a safer place?
Uh,
yes, I believe we are actually. I think it's not just about-
Are you talking about the police or the government?
Oh, I ask the questions.
Um...
(laughs)
Yes, I, I, I, I believe we are actually. I, I...
It's not only actual crime and statistics and services to victims as well,
it's also about feelings of safety.
And one of the things that we've noticed is that whilst we're still challenged and,
you know, some, across some communities about where that needs to be, it's why we
keep working hard at that. But, um,
I believe that we have made good progress, uh, in what's
been a very busy year.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but I know that we've made good progress and I...
One of the things I want to point to is that I, um, get the feeling
every day, every week, from my staff across the country that they
are, their morale is
tracking upwards in the right direction.
Uh, they know that we're focused on the right priorities.
They know that they've got an executive that supports them, that backs them.
That makes them feel better about the job they do, which is tough.
Um, and, uh, we all work really hard together.
So I actually think we're in a really good space.
We've had some big challenges to navigate.
And as I've referred to already, IPCA report is one of those.
But we can't lose sight of, uh, morale across the organization
going in the right direction. There's massive support out there from the New
Zealand public for the job that we do.
Uh, and I, I know that that's translating into results.
Um-
Would the results of, say, uh, 38,000 fewer victims of violent
crime over the last year or the 15% reduction-
Yeah.
... in serious and persistent youth offending, uh, reiterate the point
that-
Mm-hmm.
... since you first came in a year ago to today-
Yeah.
... uh, that New Zealand is a safer place under your leadership?
Abs- absolutely. Uh, it's not, and it's not just me, it's all
of my colleagues. And the w- wi- wider work of your frontline and, and actually all of your staff?
A- absolutely.
If we, if we look at where we're at with both those two targets,
um, uh, youth and violence, both of
which have been, met those targets well ahead of, uh, the
time frames that we were aiming for, that's, that is an absolute success
story for the government and for, uh, New Zealand.
And certainly for my staff who have worked really hard to contribute to that
result.
And, uh, out of curiosity, because we had a line of questioning on it, um,
what do mem- uh, prospective members of a gang have to
do to earn their gang patch?
Well, um, for a start, they shouldn't be breaking the law because that's our job to
deal with it if they do.
Mm-hmm.
So, um, if they break the law, and particularly the new legislation that's been in
place since the 21st of November-...
expect consequences if you breach it.
And, and the results that we've achieved with that new legislation speak for
themselves.
And in the example that Mr. Waititi used around the, um,
situation at Matapihi, for example, uh,
why, uh, yes, you enforced on the gang patch legislation, but
why did people in attendance also then have other
illegal property with them, e.g. firearms?
Yeah.
Some had, uh, cannabis and drugs there as well.
Um, isn't that inappropriate to take to something of that sort of
event, and literally, uh, your frontline staff there were doing their job of
enforcement?
Yes, that's correct.
Um, that's correct because, um, you know, we did take some
criticism for why some of my staff, uh, uh, were
armed. That is simply because we had information to suggest there may be
firearms present. And sure enough, when we stopped the car and we searched
it, we found firearms.
Thank you.
Okay, uh, one supplementary from, um, Ms. Clark.
And, and speaking of, um, being on the right track, um,
applications to join the police increased from
5,282 to 8,825
year-on-year, uh, on page 20, 44, I think, of the, um,
of the annual report.
That's
right. Um, what does that say about-
Says... Yes, good question. We are working really, really hard
to encourage people to join, uh, New Zealand Police.
It's an outstanding career, and those results also reflect the effort that we've
put into recruitment. Um, it's only, uh, as recent
as last week, it'd be fair to say, uh, when Andrea attended for me in
Australia alongside other police organizations where New Zealand was
called out as leading the way, uh, when it comes to the effort that we put into
recruiting and those statistics demonstrate, uh, how that
translates into results.
Thank you.
Okay, we're gonna have one sup from Ms. Anderson.
Um, it's really encouraging that your, um, experience and vibes from being in the
community are that, that people are feeling safer.
How do you think that, um, pans out with the fact there's been a
30% increase in homicides? So in
2023, '22/'23, there were 227
homicides. The last year we've had 297
murders in New Zealand.
Mm-hmm.
Um, if people are f- are feeling safer, how does a
30% increase in, in homicides equate with
what-
Yeah.
... you're seeing on the ground and feeling?
It's a fair question. I mean, that is one crime statistic that is not something
that anyone should be proud of in our country.
Um, New Zealand Police works incredibly hard to ensure that we also make a
difference there. We've got some way to go.
Many of the homicide situations we deal with, um, uh,
involve organized crime networks, gangs.
Um,
that's why we put the effort in that we do.
Uh, they also often involve family harm-related incidents, people who
actually know each other, um, in a familiar way so
that's-
Mm-hmm.
... also a statistic that New Zealand needs to turn around.
We, we are working across the board but when you look at all the different crime
types, th- that's just one of them, but it's not one that, um, anyone should be
proud
of. Is there anything you're particularly doing to address that really big increase, a
third increase, in homicides? Is there any specific actions that you're
driving in your leadership to address that-
Mm-hmm.
... concerning trend we're seeing?
Well, that's, that's where our priorities become relevant because, you know,
New Zealand police could be off doing a whole lot of other things that aren't
necessarily delivering results.
Um, that's why I talk about focus on core policing.
What should we be doing, whether it's mental health changes, the
triaging of, uh, calls for service around family harm
even s- you know, since we triaged calls for help around
family harm, we've actually had the capacity to respond to higher priority
family harm. That has to have a correlation.
It's gonna take some time to shift that but, uh, we, we appreciate that the
priorities at the highest level across the organization are all making sure that
the time we have available to do our jobs is well invested.
I can
only- Um, excuse me, Commissioner, can I just, um, support you here and, um, I'll ask the
team behind to double-check. Um, but as of this year
for 2025, uh, we are tracking at 82 homicides is
what we have. Now that is two over than this time last year with
27, circa 27 of those being family harm-related.
But like I say, because there's a discrepancy, I'll ask that the Assistant
Commissioner of Investigations, um, double-checks on that.
That's not done.
Okay, now I'm gonna go to Ms. Paul. Thank you for that.
Be good if you could provide that inf- uh, information to the committee.
I'm going to Ms. Paul, I'll remind members we should be now talking about road
safety, but I'm at the, uh, liberty of the
committee. What
Yeah, well I was, uh, I thought this was the core policing section so
ask about-
Yeah, but we're past that point but y- I'll let you do it but I'm just saying to
members-
Okay.
... uh, we're con- curtailing time in other areas.
Yeah, thanks for your direction, Chair.
Um, I wanna ask about sexual violence reporting, um,
especially in light of the Jeven McSkimming
report which has really emphasized the,
uh, a lack of trust and confidence in particularly women
reporting and being believed, um, when they're reporting family or sexual
violence. So, in light of the IPCA report and
all of the people who have kinda come forward and shared their experiences of not
being believed by the police when they report, and the
statistics, this one's a bit outdated, but the 94%, um, under-reporting of sexual
violence-
Yeah.
... can you talk to us about how you're gonna-
Yeah. ... fulfill those recommendations and change that culture that exists?
Yeah, yeah sure. I, I can and I'll, I'll come to Tasha in a moment, but just a
comment from me is that New Zealand Police has worked really,
really hard over many years to ensure that we offer the best
possible service to victims including of sexual crime, uh, or allegations
of sexual crime. So, we've worked really, really hard.
I've been a detective myself. I've made my contribution.
We have gone from strength to strength.
What the IPCA report identified was a departure
from those well-understood structures and processes for
dealing with complaints of a sexual nature.
That was, that was one of the things that was called out, um, should never have
ever happened.... uh, had we allowed the very
well-trained and committed police staff to, to do their
job, um, the outcome would have been different.
But the executive at the time, uh, elected to depart from that,
for reasons that are, are, are called out in the report.
Um, that should never have happened.
I'll just come to Tasha-
Mm-hmm.
... to, to talk more about what we're doing.
So, you are right. It is significantly under-reported, sexual violence.
Also, child protection. Um, so for decades, we've been in the
battle, uh, to get people to come to us to report.
And when I say "us," I'm talking about the wider us, the
advocates, uh, um, Women's Refuge, the Rape Crisis, um,
to come and work with us. So, you know, here today, we are, um, looking, we've
got 5,700 investigations of adult sexual
assault. Um, and we know that's significantly under-reported.
Um, but what we are doing is... and you know over the last few weeks of, um,
reignited some of my partnerships, um, with our incredible advocates that work on
the ground every single day, uh, working with, um, survivors of
ASA. And so, it's something that we are working on
together. We, we know we're not perfect. We never probably will be.
But, uh, to the commissioner's point, we have long reflected, we have learnt
the lessons of the commission of inquiry, we still need to keep learning them,
around our systems and processes.
That is why, uh, we have more dedicated adult sexual assault
investigators around the country. We have ASA teams.
We know that it is specialist. Last week, um, we just had,
um, you know, one of our senior ASA-specific
courses. Um, but you're right. We have a lot of work to
do, uh, the wider we across community, to make sure that there
aren't victims sitting in communities that think they can't come to
anyone, because they actually can.
And just sorry-
Yeah, you go ahead.
... just a quick sub- just one sub on that one.
Um,
stalking legislation, so that just passed, I think, two weeks ago,
um, and a big component of that is police notification upon-
Yeah.
... the first incident being reported. That's massive.
I mean, people have been murdered, um, due to a litany of police
failures as reported in the IPCA report on Farzana Yaqubi, um,
who was, um, reported to the police-
Mm-hmm.
... but unfortunately she was murdered by her stalker.
Um, how are you gearing up to, to implement and
enforce that really great piece of legislation and to prevent stalking?
Yeah. Uh, I can probably call on Jeremy to talk a little bit more to the work
that has been going on leading into that new legislation,
and we will hope the difference that it will make. Jeremy?
Thanks. Yeah. We worked alongside Justice, who led that, uh,
legislation, helping to ensure it was gonna deliver the outcomes that people were
after. We agree it's a great piece of legislation.
We are currently, uh, working through the process of training our staff, building
in our systems so that people can report appropriately online.
As you say, it's a new opportunity for us to identify people who are expressing
harm and support victims, and we are gearing up to be prepared for when the
commencement comes into place, that we'll be ready to implement it.
Will that include any kind of, um, training for police
officers to, um, I don't know, be able to
identify stalking? 'Cause I guess the, the gap in the legislation was really just
understanding the pattern and context of stalking behavior.
So, what kind of training might there be for individual police
officers to take it seriously? 'Cause I guess some of the complaints might be a bit
benign or a little bit, you know, not concerning to a police officer.
They might think, "Oh, we can't do anything about that." But obviously the law is
changing, so how are we gonna step up that competence?
Um, Jeremy, I can maybe help, um, from a training aspect.
Um, so you're right. It's not a one-and-done scenario.
Um, so, um, what we are looking at is what needs to come in at the TED.
So, uh, for recruit training, what needs to be in there, to your point, to
identify stalking.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and then our investigations, um, our
leadership, um, because it's an end-to-end investigation, and we
need to ensure from the moment our staff walk through the door at what could
be, you know, a report, are we looking for the right things, are we intewing-
interviewing the victim. So, in a long way to say this, when we, when we say
training, training in itself isn't the answer.
We have to ensure that it's really targeted, that it's informed, and that we
keep going. It won't be a one-and-done. So, you're right.
Okay, I've got a sup from Mr. Bates.
Thanks, Chair. You just mentioned stalking.
And in the context of the stalking and harassment legislation that's just recently
been passed by Parliament, can you give confidence to
people out there who may be victims or are victims in the
future about the implementation of that new piece of
legislation by police?
Who do you want to, who's got that?
Um, yeah, so we c- definitely can give confidence.
Um, and the reality is, again, um, we will ensure the
training, the identification, so our people know.
What is really critical though, because if we look at a lot of, um, homicides
or, uh, when we investigate, you know, people know.
Um, sometimes we don't get a phone call on the first time, you know.
Um, you know, family will know, people will know.
So, we, we really urge everyone to come to us at their first
concern. Um, but to your point, absolutely, we take this really seriously.
If we look at the history of stalking, um, you know, it can lead to
terrible outcomes. Um, so yeah, we will take it seriously-
But,
uh- ... and we, and we give the public confidence of that.
Thank you.
Right. Uh, very important line of questioning, but we are going to a different
line. Uh, we're now gonna talk, uh, cars.
So, Mr. Stevenson.
Road safety. Thank you.
Um, Nick, can I go to you please?
There's actually two areas of road safety I wanna dive into.
Can I get you too?
Um-
Road safety.
One is, obviously we got three agencies kind of involved in improving road
safety, right? We've got NZTA, Ministry of Transport, and obviously the police.
So, just wanna understand, um, how you kinda deal
with having three different agencies focused on this task.
There's b- different terminology and measurements.
So, just really wanna work out how you're kind of working that
between you. But I also wanna give you a chance to...
the other topic obviously is, there's been some-
Yeah.
... concerns raised around, um-...
breath testing-
Sure.
... and data.
Yeah.
So, probably good if we address that upfront too-
Mm-hmm.
... and get your comments on that and what you're putting in place to-
Yeah.
... to deal with that. 'Cause I think that will be a big concern to New Zealanders.
Yeah, good question. Y- you're right, three agencies are key to making sure we get
better outcomes on the roads across New Zealand.
Uh, police have got a massive contribution to make.
I've got one of my assistant commissioners here who has that in his portfolio.
Uh, through, so our structure and our governance in terms of our interface with
those other agencies is strong 'cause it has to be.
But New Zealand Police is not the only agency.
Uh, we enforce the law, um, and we also deliver outputs
which we hope translate to outcomes.
Um, at the moment, across New Zealand our- our road toll, uh,
is, uh, just a little bit higher than where it was at the same time last year.
Um, but if I look at, and I do, weekly at the results,
um, of staff in terms of their delivery, whether it's
restraints or it's alcohol or it's speed or,
um, other distractions, um, actually we are- we are
delivering, um, good results in that respect.
Um, the, uh, breath testing
situation, that was an algorithm that we elected, uh, to put in
place to just test the integrity of that data.
And unfortunately, um, we found, uh, about
130 staff that, uh, appear to have, um, uh,
not, uh, actually done a breath test, um, but they've activated a
device. Um, so we are following up on each of those.
Uh, that's disappointing and we've been totally upfront and honest about
that, um. But the reality is, and sad part of it is, actually that
wouldn't have changed the, um, delivery on the contract that we have in place with
other agencies. We were already meeting that measure, so it was totally
unnecessary. So, it's a little bit baffling as to why there was a need
to- to do what was done. But we- we will, we followed up on
each, uh, every case and, um, uh,
I know that the
visibility that we've had around that particular issue will be corrective in itself
and, uh, as a- as a message to all police staff that, uh, that's not what, uh,
that's not meeting the expectations.
Well, just one quick supplementary.
There you go.
Um, just looking through the, obviously we've talked about the three agencies, have
you given thought, because it's actually
two of the agencies have, well actually, all the agencies have slightly different
measurements-
Yes, sure.
... around,
um-
Yes.
... yeah, basically road safety outcomes.
Have you given thought or have you talked to your agency partners about-
Most definitely.
... actually having some, uh, maybe one measure, um, and
also there's, they, not everyone has a, even a target or a consistent target
either. So, have you given-
Sure. ... some thought to that to try and align-
Y-
... outcomes and targets?
Yes, look, I'm gonna call on Assistant Commissioner Mike Johnston who has that
within his portfolio and is involved in many of these discussions.
So Mike, if I can call on you, if that's all right?
Thank you.
Sure.
Kia Ora, Mr. Committee,
um, sir. Uh, yes, um, we have a senior executives group
with all of the agencies that, uh, you're referring to.
We, uh, regularly, uh, meet and talk about
performance firstly, uh, about targets and in and
around how each of the agency's activities layer
to make the safer environment on the roads.
Uh, it's absolutely, uh, imperative, uh, that we
affect the number of deaths and serious injuries that are on the
roads. Uh, the performance that the commissioner referred to that
we internally are contracted to deliver on as part of
that road safety system, in its broader sense, is
absolutely something we look at every week.
Uh, we talk to each of the districts, we look at performance on a
district, national, uh, and local level.
And we, uh, talk, uh, actively about how do we keep
improving that performance in our space.
But then also, uh, the higher level strategic question, which
I think's the one you're referring to, how does that system, uh,
integrate? And those discussions are active, uh,
at the senior executives group that, uh, oversees that on
behalf of all of those agencies.
So, do you think we might see some closer alignment in everyone's
targeting and, or, that yet to be determined?
I- it's certainly something that the agencies are striving
towards and we would absolutely welcome, uh, that.
But that system in its broader sense is the one that we're really interested
in.
Okay, we've got three people-
Supplementary,
John. ... who want to ask questions on this issue. Right. So, uh, Mr.
Rutherford?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Commissioner, in
2023-'24 police undertook 3.6 million
breath tests.
Mm-hmm.
And then in the '24-'25 year, which was a record-
Yeah. ... and then in the '24-'25 year, undertook 4.2 million
breath tests.
I'm just trying to understand the rationale as to why people would feel the need
to effectively fudge breath tests.
What- what's the rationale for wanting to do that?
Yeah.
Noting that you weren't the one to do so.
No, no. And- and I s-
But what- what's the rationale for people to do that?
Well, that's, I've grappled with the same issue 'cause it was not necessary.
We were already doing an exceptional job.
Uh, so yeah,
we're following up with all of those people and asking them- them that very
question. So, it's a little bit early to- They're not remunerated in any way?
They're not- ... recognized?
There's no, yeah, there's no bonus or-
No, no, no, no, no, no.
Yeah. Okay, just to be clear.
No.
And, uh, okay. Well, you're following up with them, but obviously-
Yes.
... you will have spoken to some of them already.
What has been the rationale is- that some of them have given you?
Uh,
Mike, can you talk to that?
Absolutely, I can. Um, there's mixed- there's mixed
explanations coming from the 130 odd individuals
that we, um, are dealing with in relation to this issue.
Uh, some of them refer to performance, uh, and their
belief that they need to meet targets.
And- and that is something that I've talked about.
We do talk about those things at different levels.
We don't do it down to officer level-...
and that's, uh, an important factor in this.
So, that's one of the things that's coming through.
Um, there's internal, uh, issues officer by officer who
feel they want to be showing they're really excellent at their job, which is
a credit to them, but they're misplaced in this.
It's absolutely not meeting with our values.
It's not, uh... we've picked it up as an internal,
uh, as we've developed an internal algorithm, and we've fronted that in dealing
with it internally as is appropriate.
So, there is a range of factors in answer to your question.
There's not one answer to it. And the 130, are they geographically split
across New Zealand or are they all generally from the same area?
Um, there are some areas that, uh, have more than others, but
that is spread across New Zealand. What are the areas that have more than others?
Uh, so, uh, Canterbury, Wellington, and,
uh, one of the Auckland districts, uh, seem to have more.
Which are they?
Um, I've got-
That said, uh-
I've got it.
... it is s-... there is, uh, staff across the country in all districts who we
are dealing with. Uh- Thank you.
Okay. I'm going to Miss Paul, and then I'm go- coming back to Miss Nicklade.
All right, what about me?
Cool. So just on the road
safety- No, no.
Um, and on the, um-
Road safety, yep.
... breath testing-
Yeah, road safety, I've got
us covered. ... um, I've got a follow-up question about, um, the roadside drug
testing test. So obviously, we've got the 30,000
tests falsified or erroneous, whatever,
which doesn't create a whole lot of confidence, which you've acknowledged.
That's fine. Um, but the roadside drug testing devices,
there's been a lot of, um, evidence to show that these are flawed devices, that
they can pick up things like, um, ADHD medication,
amphetamines, um, and be, um, misidentified as, say,
methamphetamine or whatever.
Are you concerned that when roadside drug testing picks
up, that this is gonna contribute to more failed tests?
And what are you doing to mitigate the fact that the technology
isn't sound? So you're kind of setting u- some officers up
to fail because the technology
isn't- Yeah. I can probably start with this one, Mike.
But, so the testing which begins this month in, in Wellington and throughout
2026 will roll out across the country, uh, tests for four
different drug types, cannabis, NDMA,
methamphetamine, and cocaine. Uh, and there are procedures in
place, uh, to ensure that the integrity of the data and the process is the best
that it possibly can be. So, Mike, anything you want to add to that?
Sure. Um, firstly, I'll talk to the device.
So, it's been through, uh, a rigorous process of
scientific, uh, um, assessment around
the, uh, along with, um, the
nationally and internationally in relation to getting that right.
Um, we have a pilot, as the commissioner rightly says, that starts in
Wellington, uh, later this month, and we will be
kee-... um, focused on that very closely.
Uh, in relation to the... So we, we have confidence in the device and
the testing regime from everything we know to date, and we will be very
alive to that issue as we run the pilot.
Secondly, in relation to the data, for the reasons I've talked about, we are
absolutely focused to make sure that we have the data absolutely
right before we, uh, take any enforcement action.
Uh-
Like roll it, roll it out more widely?
We, we will post the pilot. That is the intention to do that,
to enforce that legislation nationally.
Uh, we're starting with Wellington to make sure that we get that right and look
at our processes, and that will then enable the technological
solution that will enable that to roll out nationally.
Okay, last question over here.
Can I just ask a quick technical-
No, right. Right, last one.
Can I just ask a quick technical one on that?
Yeah.
Will you commit to, um, on, based on your pilot results, if there
are a certain number of, uh, failed tests, incorrect,
erroneous, whatever tests, will you relook at rolling it
out nationwide if the pilot turns up problems?
And if so, what would make you maybe relook at that
approach?
We will be looking at the pilot very closely to make sure that it's suitable
and that it's, um, just and right, uh, in a
law enforcement setting for the legislation.
If that's not right, we will look at that and make adjustments
or take the appropriate action without predetermining what that might look
like.
Okay, now we're meant to be into supporting Frontline, so I'm going to Miss
Anderson.
Oh, I just had, um...
We skipped completely over firearms, so I just had one question in relation to
firearms. Um, the restructure of the Firearms
Safety Authority, who is funding that?
I'm just going to turn to Superintendent Richard Wilson, who here represents the
Firearms Safety Authority.
Good afternoon, everyone. Yes, thanks, Commissioner.
So, the funding of that is it's obviously that whole, um, program is
led by the Ministry of Justice as part of their policy program.
So I'd probably defer to them around that.
But what police's role is in that is, uh, making sure that the firearms enforcement
that we, part that we undertake, uh, is, you know, still stays the
same. So our firearms enforcement doesn't change.
In regards to the funding, that's something that we'd have to refer to Justice
because that's something that they're working through with the Associate Minister
of Justice.
So you don't know whether it's at a police baseline or justice baseline?
Is that right?
No, no, we don't know that yet because we're still waiting just for that policy,
those policy decisions to be made.
So, Justice question then?
And as I said, it's through Justice.
Yep.
Um, and also, is there any, uh, rough estimate on what
the cost of that restructure will be?
Again, I'd have to refer that to Justice. Justice are doing the work, um, on that.
We're supporting that work with the information that we have today around how the
Firearms Safety Authority runs. And I'd just like to say it's running, uh, really
positively today. We've had significant, um, success with the firearms registry in
other areas. But to answer your question directly, the, the costing associated with
that is all being led out of Ministry of Justice.
Okay. Then, do you want to talk about Frontline?
Yeah, we just missed out on firearms, so we'll have those
Yeah.
... questions later. In terms of, uh, Frontline,
uh, the-
Primary.
Is, is there any view, Commissioner, on why it's been really difficult to reach
that 500? Is there any sort of reasons what's been the main drivers
of, um, failing to meet that initial target of 27
November?
The, the target of November, um, was
always aspirational. Um-
It's in the coalition agreement.
Yeah.
I wouldn't say it's aspirational.
Yes. Yes. Yes, it was. It was.
Very difficult.
Yeah, it was, it was a challenge.
Definitely.
Um, we could've, we could've achieved it, but actually, we
would've had to have dropped standards.
And I think the more important thing here is to ensure the caliber of New Zealand
police officer is the best that it can be.
Yes.
So, that's the compromise that has been accepted.
Um, and, and I've already spoken about how hard we are working to, to achieve that
500. Um, uh, it's certainly been a very, very busy year.
And I've had a lot of people across the organization working very, very hard to,
to, uh, as a team, to create those opportunities.
And, and one success story is obviously the opening of the Auckland-based or the
Albany-based, um, training center.
We've had a wing already graduate.
We have another on- one starting in, uh, February.
We're actually oversubscribed at the moment.
We were aiming for 40, I think we've got 55 wanting to start in Auckland in
February. Um, we're just working (laughs) through that.
Maybe we can take all of them. But, you know, there's, there's a lot of work that's
gone on and a lot of new initiatives that help has, have helped us to deliver as
early as we can, but not compromising standards.
And what was the cost associated with setting up that Auckland campus?
Ooh. Gill, can you comment on that one?
Um, probably an Andrea question.
Andrea question. Finance, money?
Oh, gosh. That's right. Yeah. (laughs)
Maybe something we have to come back to you on.
Um-
Yeah.
... to give the specifics, I'd need to come back to you
exactly on that. Yeah, let's, um, note that for a question, uh, for an answer. Yeah.
I, I can have one more, then. Um,
can you talk us through that Auckland polit- co- police college,
uh, pilot? Uh, and, you know, 'cause I understand that you still have
recruits coming down to Porirua for five weeks as well as that.
Yeah. So, have there been any sort of lessons learned or, um-
Yeah.
... you know, outcomes as a result of that?
And, and, like, if they're going and doing some in Auckland and then still having
to come to Porirua-
Yeah.
... is, are you gonna change that?
Or is it gonna stay in-
There's a couple things I, and I will come to Gill in a minute.
But o- on day one when the first wing turned up, um, and I
asked the question of them, I said, "Who is here because we've provided the
opportunity to train in Auckland and go home to your families?" Or for
those, uh, seven that were from Northland, uh, not that far away, uh, head
home. And most hands went up in the room.
And I say, "Well, that's a success in itself because we've created the opportunity
that they may not have taken if they had to spend 20 weeks in
Porirua." So, um, I know that with the 55 that are signed up for
February, it's probably a similar story. So that, that's a success story in itself.
The fact that we bring people down to Porirua for five weeks of that
20 is really just about the facilities that we need to have in place for them to
train. Um, Gill, you want to add to that?
Yeah. As, um, we set out when we first started the negotiations to take on
that space at Massey University, it was initially intended to be the
location that we would deliver our senior courses with the
RNZPC Porirua campus being filled with recruits as we pushed the
numbers through there. But then it became evident we had this cohort in Auckland
that were untapped and we wanted to test the waters, hence the
pilot that started in July. What we've seen out of that, that,
um, as the Commissioner said, we were able to accommodate seven people from
Northland that, for them, it was unrealistic for them to travel to Porirua,
um, and then expect to be able to get home during that 20-week training period.
Whereas being based in Albany allowed them to go home at the
weekends. Um, we provided accommodation for those that were traveling
from either Northland or from the further regions of the Tamaki
Makaurau, um, district. And so 19 took up the
opportunity to be accommodated there.
Um, interestingly, those that said (laughs) that they wanted to, um, y- be able to
go home at the end of the day saw the facilities and things that we had there, and
many more of them wanted to stay on campus as well.
Um, so it's been a huge success to see, um,
that wing graduate out of there. Some of the logistics around the timing
for why we needed to bring 'em to Porirua for that five weeks of driving
training and firearms training has been logistical capacity through our ranges and
things in, um, the Auckland location.
If we were able to secure alternative venues, we would ideally love to keep them
in, um, the, in the region. But, um, there are also
benefits of them bringing them down to Porirua and being able to interact with
other, um, wings, being able to see the police college,
um, see the training, um, there, use the scenario village, all of those
sorts of benefits that we've got from it.
But as the Commissioner said, the next wing that starts the 9th of February-
That's fine.
That's fine. ... oversubscribed. We've got 55 that want to come, and we're planning for 40.
So we'll see how we can manage that.
Thank you.
Can I... Sorry, can I add one more thing? I think it's quite important.
That is part of our recruiting strategy.
Um, Canterbury is actually oversubscribed in terms of people who want to join the
police. We don't need anyone else in Canterbury right now. They're full.
That's good.
(laughs)
Um, but we have been-
(laughs) ... down there recently and said, uh, "Would anybody who's in the pipeline in
Canterbury like to go and consider starting their career in other parts of New
Zealand?" So not only have we created opportunities for Auckland and
Northland-based new colleagues, but we, uh, had 40 turn
up, uh, keen to look at opportunities in other parts of the country, including
in places where traditionally it has been a bit of a challenge, like
Northland, uh, like eastern parts of Bay of Plenty, the
Waikato. So we, we're looking at e- all the different sort of initiatives to say,
"Actually, how can we meet the 500 as early as possible, but with the right
person and in the right parts of New Zealand?" So, um, pretty
successful. Even I got down there to Christchurch to meet with many of them and
say, "Yeah, look. I've, even in my own career, I've worked in different parts of
New Zealand. Why not start somewhere else other than home?"
Yeah. (laughs)
Okay, last one.
Um, last question. Budget '24 saw investment in a new police boat
for Auckland. Uh, at the same time, we've seen, uh,
hours cut for the Wellington capability on the Lady Elizabeth,
been big concerns from maritime workers that there could be-
Sure.
... potentially lives lost as a result of, of that asset not being
available around the clock. Is there any reason why Wellington's not been-
Yeah, look-
... prioritized?
... we're very lucky to have with us here Acting Assistant Commissioner Cory Pa-
Cory Parnell, who is the Wellington district commander.
So Cory, do you wanna come up and explain a little bit of the rationale and the
thinking betwi- behind the, um, the rosters-
Tell us why Wellington's important.
Yes, very helpful.
No, we don't have a boat.
(laughs)
All right, thank you for the opportunity.
Um, yeah, so as the commissioner said, uh, District Commander for the last six
years here in Wellington. Um, our Maritime Unit is one of probably
my bigger cost pressures, quite frankly, in terms of the operational
environment. I currently have 12 operatives, um, with full
qualification that, that operate the vessel, and, um, we do have a
standby facility, so they, um, on shifts, uh,
to, if they're called out after hours, um, and the limit is to
service the boat, we'd have to roll out five officers.
What I've looked at over the last 12 months is actually the, the number of
deployments. Um, and when you get into the figures, they've actually been called
out four times, uh, after hours, uh, to deploy.
Only on one of those occasions did they actually deploy.
And what I do find even in the day shifts, often with our lan- uh,
water rescues, by the time we actually get to an event, it's actually
resolved. Um, in terms of the fiscal responsibility, I've looked at the
cost associated with having our members on call after
hours. Uh, that is circa $130,000, uh, per annum at the
present moment. And I've simply had to do a cost v.
benefit, uh, realization around that.
That said, it hasn't diminished the service delivery.
Uh, there are other, um, assets that are on the harbor in
terms of deployment. I still have the, um, opportunity to deploy
a helicopter response, which often does happen in terms of in a harbor water
rescue. Uh, and invariably, um, the more broad
question for New Zealand Police at the present moment is, what is the
national, uh, delivery model for maritime
services for NZ Police? Because you have a Maritime Unit in Auckland and you
have a Maritime Unit here in, in Wellington.
We have a small footprint in Waikato.
However, the rest of the country is serviced either by the partner agency
or we would have to deploy, for say, um, SailGP, uh,
either the maritime asset or our Auckland assets.
Right, I'm going to, one question from the-
No, sure, my question has been answered.
All right, okay.
I've got a sup
for Superintendent Parnell.
Right, last one and then I'm going to a new line of questioning right
here.
Kia ora.
Yes.
Um, so one of, uh, what...
There was a Vietnamese police delegation visiting New Zealand, and while they were
here, it was alleged that they sexually assaulted a woman
in Wellington. Um, I want to know,
because you're, you have written responses to some of the questions
that we've asked around the extradition of these Vietnamese police
officers, what's happening with that situation and what work, um, did
police do to, um, get accountability from those
visiting, um, officers?
Sure. So we've, uh, worked across, uh, with the Vietnamese officials.
Uh, it is a continuing, um, exercise there, if you like.
Uh, we sought extradition. There is no extradition, um,
moratorium between the two countries, uh, so we
commissioned to the, uh, his, um, officials
there, uh, so that was a negative response.
Um, we have subsequently, uh, revisited in terms of
exploring with the Vietnamese, uh, as to whether there are
other opportunities in the disciplinary, uh, capability.
Uh, and that at this very, as in today, is at
the next stage of, of what we might be able to, uh, further.
Okay, that's, um, going to Mr. Bates now. New line of questioning.
Thank you, Chair. Um, wanted to chat a little bit about
the implementation of the number of police going back
out on the beat in CBDs around the country, and just how that's
going. And I've got a couple of sups to that, Chair.
That's great.
Okay?
Yes, look, um, of the new 500, uh,
160 staff are dedicated to
community beat patrols. Um,
and in many respects, uh, they began first in the bigger
centers, and the feedback across those communities has
been exceptional. Um, but the way I look at it is
this, that 10,451 constabulary
staff as of this week across the organization, it's not about
160 in 500 or anyone else that works in a community
policing team, wherever it is in the country.
10,451 constabulary staff can
make a contribution to visibility and, uh, and be
present wherever that may be. And that's one of the initiatives behind
frontline service model, uh, where, as I
said, over 600,
uh, constabulary staff who are non-frontline but still have very important
roles, I've set the expectation that in any
12-month period, they do at least five shifts
out, uh, on the front line alongside their peers helping
out.
Yep.
That equates to 25,000 extra hours of
policing at the front line.
Right.
And it's saying to those people, uh, who are very enthusiastic
about, um, actually many respects where they began their careers, on the front
line, um, that yes, they've got a contribution to make and it's back to
basics. Uh, that's been really well received.
Um, it's achievable with a bit of planning for those that have other roles like
prosecutions and things like that.
But it's a good initiative because they're paid to be police
officers, so we need to deploy as police officers
too.
Fantastic. So I know that in Whanganui is one of the places
where there's a permanent-
Yes.
... uh, retail crime, uh, on the beat.
And I know that there's also been a reduction in retail crime over
the last 12 months-
Right.
... uh, in Whanganui itself. Is there a correlation between the
fact you've made that commitment-
Yes.
... you've got that 25,000 extra hours across the country-
Is that
a- ... uh, on the beat, and the reduction in retail crime we're seeing in
many provincial and urban centers across the country?
Sure, yes. So the extra 25,000 hours is more likely to kick in
actually in the new year.
Okay.
But what we are seeing across the country, Whanganui is one example, Invercargill
is another, Gisborne is another, uh, Tauranga is another, where we
have, uh, set an expectation at, at the most senior level,
um, that, uh, retail crime is a priority.
Um-
... towns across New Zealand and police services, uh, uh, well, at
least police teams are deciding how best to meet
both expectations, retail crime, community, uh,
beat, most recently even in Christchurch.
And so, there is an absolute correlation that not only are we increasing
our visibility in communities, but that presence alone is having an impact
on retail crime. Uh, so it's a, it's a success story and what I constantly
hear back from the retail community is actually the presence is,
uh, appreciated. Um, the resolutions are
appreciated. Um, it's like many crime types actually, you've got a mi- a
small number responsible for the majority of crime.
So, through various initiatives we're, we're targeted on enforcing the law
and the r- the response, uh, is an increase in trust and confidence.
Um, so that's a real success story.
Wow.
Whanganui's one example of a success story.
Yeah. Last sup on that, Chair, so taking Whanganui as an
example, we recently had a retail crime forum with the retailers-
Yeah.
... uh, from across the city and New Zealand police was present at
that. And there was some really positive feedback, as you say, about
the, how that was being perceived, the increase in trust and confidence-
Yeah.
... and ultimately the results, uh, in the statistics as well.
Are you getting that feedback? And does that go to your team on the
front line across the country when you receive it in other places?
Yes, it does. Absolutely. Uh, recently we had a police-
(clears throat)
... leadership forum which is all of the senior leadership, including district
commanders come together here in Wellington.
And one of the things that we discussed that day, just a month or two
ago, was of the 37 areas across New
Zealand, uh, I asked for, um,
what initiatives were in place in each of those areas to deal with retail crime.
Yep.
And alongside those initiatives you look at the results that are
or aren't being achieved, and the re- and that includes the resolutions,
and it is very clear that where there is yet to be an initiative in
place,
there may not be the impact on retail crime or visibility in communities that is
expected. So, that is by virtue of the fact that we are
looking at that level of detail-
Yeah.
Yeah. ... encouraging others to do something about it.
Yep. And that is why one of the targets I spoke about at the beginning is about a
15% increase in resolutions. You can't achieve that unless you do something.
Is it all-
Right, members, I'm very conscious we should be on social demand.
I'm gonna take one, uh, Dr. Duncan Webb,
and then let's start focusing on social deman-
(clears throat)
Mr. Ferris, I'm gonna come to you shortly.
How do
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just on, um, the
beat, cops on the beat in, in retail areas, I'm interested in
your perspectives on the trade-offs.
Um, in Christchurch, the Phillipstown Community Policing Team-
Right.
... was disestablished, um, so that they could walk around, you know,
Klassen's and Stuart Dawson's rather than what's a deprived
community with vulnerable young people and a high r- rate of gang
membership. Um, and obviously-
Sure.
... if you've got other officers coming in, you know, m- leaving
intelligence work so they do their five shifts on the beat, there are
trade-offs there.
Yeah.
I accept you've had improvements in retail crime.
What are the costs of that?
Yeah, look, there's, there's always gonna be trade-offs.
Um, I'll get Tasha to talk to the Canterbury situation in a moment and she has
oversight of the district, but one thing I would say is that the 12 district
commanders across the country, it's their responsibility to make deployment
decisions, um, dealing with, as Tasha's even said, dealing with the
current, um, spike in the last couple of weeks-
Yeah.
... around roo- youth crime when we bring a team together to focus on young people
or gangs or, or any other particular issue that needs attention.
Um, we have to make the sort of deployment decisions and, uh, Tasha, anything
you want to add to that in relation to...
Um-
Yeah, um, uh, so Dr. Webb, you're right, Phillipstown, I mean, we initially put it
in as a neighborhood policing team back in the day and it was really successful, it
won awards. The whole concept of the neighborhood policing team at, at the
time was to do those surveys with communities, look at the demand where we should
go, and the key outcome was to build the partnerships, uh,
with that community, um, from a multi-agency aspect so that
we could, at time, come out. That actually didn't happen, and then we
had to make the decision actually we do need to police across the whole, and that's
why it's so important now that we look at our demand profiles, uh, we look
at our demand, um, we have full deployment plans.
So, you know, I would be very surprised if, uh,
Phillipstown isn't still getting a service it needs for that demand, but
we have to prioritize across the community.
But just going back to your first thing, the neighborhood policing team that was
put in there, they were always meant to come out of community at the time once
we had built our partnership with the community to address the underlying
issues.
I guess my real question though was around, that was one example of a trade-off,
right?
Yeah.
My real question was, what about the trade-offs across things like
responding in communities to family violence or looking after those
kids who are now doing ram raids in Christchurch?
Yeah. The d- I mean, look, yes, those are the challenging decisions that we have to
make daily in terms of, uh, where we put
resources. Um, the Phillipstown-
So potentially you are p- prioritizing retail crime over other
crime?
Well, our experience, um, and, and
intelligence confirms that many people who, uh, elect to
break the law when it comes to retail crime, uh, are often doing other
things as well. So it's not just often that, there are normally
other types of crime. So-
It's a bit of a stretch to say that shoplifters are violent
criminals.
Uh, well, there have certainly been a number of examples in our
history where that in fact is, uh, the sad reality.
Okay. Now members, we've got, uh, 16,
17 minutes and we've got two topics which we haven't focused on.
...
One is social demands for police services, the other one is partnership with
Maori. I want to make sure that members are aware of those opportunities.
Mr. Ferris, um, those are the two topics we-
Uh, yeah, I'm having a question, um-
Yes.
... if that's okay, Mr. Chair? Okay, kia ora, kia ora commissioner.
Um, look, I know you have, um, Te Huringa o te Tai as your broader Maori
strategy. Um, the DOIJ... I'm sorry, the
OAG, uh, report confirms that there are no
outcomes-based Maori KPIs. Um, that reporting
is limited to activity counts and workforce
ethnicity. They also confirm that, um, no
outcome-focused Maori indicators exist.
Um, so, you know, I'm really sort of grappling with trying to
highlight for the Maori community how the many issues
that exist between Maori and the police are going to be
addressed or what the steps forward are.
You know, so there, there seems to me there's some clear and quite alarming
trends, in my view, emerging between police and-
Okay, that's it.
...
We've got a question there. We've got a question.
Let's get the answer to that first.
Okay. So, um, as I said early, uh, earlier,
uh, obviously the audit report gives us some areas of focus.
This is, uh, likely to be one of them, obviously.
Um, we know that the results that we've achieved through many of the
initiatives that we've had in place, like Te Paerenga, have actually
delivered, um,
results that we can be proud of. It's how we may need to formalize that
more to deal with that particular, uh, area of opportunity.
So, uh, yeah, we've got a bit of work to do there to see how
we can, uh, strengthen the, um, report card on that one.
I've got a question.
Okay. So we'll, we've had a number of conversations about
inter-agency work and the connected, the connectedness
between Directions, police, and Justice.
And as, as I was saying, there seem to be, um, some very alarming trends to
me. There's a chronic avoidance of having any Maori-specific
performance targets. You know, there, there's an, a, an apparent
acceptance of the status quo and a conflating of Maori
rights against eth- listed ethnic rights.
Now these are all things that are impeding progress to me, so how are
you fundamentally going to improve the Maori
experience and the outcomes for Maori of policing delivery
through 2026, 2029?
Do you want
Well, I've al- I've already said, you know, there are a number of recommendations
that have already been made, 50 of the 51.
15 we've adopted, 29 that are on hold.
We've got more work to do before we can prioritize some of those, and,
uh, and some that we haven't accepted.
There is a, there is a bunch of opportunities in there that we are building into a
rewrite of Te Huringa o te Tai to ensure that the three particular pou that
we've focused on for a number of years and we've had very successful results are
strengthened by the, uh, other oppor-
It's the new one. ... other opportunities, particularly in relation to the initiatives, which is the
third pou, in terms of what is it going, what is it that is going to
deliver better outcomes. But we can't dismiss the fact that actually over many
years we, we have gone from strength to strength in terms
of, um, many of Te Paerenga being one of those,
um, and the relationships that we have at a local level and a national level, and I
don't think we can un- underestimate the amount of effort that's gone into that and
will continue.
Chair, given the amount of effort and the progress that's been made in the last 30
years, as you describe, are the outcomes advancing
in a similar fashion?
Oh, it remains a challenge, over-representation in crime
statistics, including victimization. We, we acknowledge that.
Um, in fact, um, in the last, um, I think it's
over the last 12 months, the, uh, Maori victimization
rates are actually dropping slightly, but we've got a long way to go because still
for many, many years in our country, we all accept there's been
over-representation in offending and victimization, and that
remains one of the key motivations for why we work so hard in this
space.
Okay, last question.
Oh, no, that's enough, thanks.
Thank you. Right. I'm gonna have one sup from Ms.
Paul, and then I'm coming back to you.
Okay. Um, on social demand-
Yeah.
... I want to talk about homelessness.
Are you working on any advice to government or
Cabinet around moving on homeless people using police
resources?
Okay. Look, I'll just call on Jeremy Wood again to talk to this one in particular,
but if I can use some operational examples, and perhaps the Auckland CBD is
one that's been in the media a, a wee bit.
New Zealand Police accept that we have a role to play, but we are just one agency
in a number, um, uh, including NGOs, uh,
including council, that actually have a role to play in dealing with
homelessness, which is not just a New Zealand problem.
So Jeremy, any particular, uh, work that you want to refer
him? Uh, yeah, I would, um, uh, reinforce that this is Justice's policy work,
so again, I think you're meeting with them tomorrow, so I'd raise it with them.
We're certainly working alongside them to ensure that any proposals, any,
uh, legislative changes feasible to be delivered, and similar to
stalking, that we would be prepared to differentiate between the behavior that were
previously, uh, non-enforceable to behavior that is.
So we're certainly working alongside them, but I would ask you to talk to them
about the policy change.
So yes?
Yes, we are working with them.
Okay, thank you.
Right. Now, we're going to Honorable Ginny Andersen.
Thank you. Uh, I've got a question around the changes to family harm
and the new risk harm assessment decision-making framework that's
now been in place for a year.
Yeah.
So, uh, despite the RHA framework resulting
in 7.7 more family harm events being coded
as priority one, the total number of family harm
investigations attended by police has decreased.
Do you have any sort of reasons-
Mm.
Sure. ... why that's happening?
Do you want me to answer that, Gina?
I can do. Um, the risk harm matrix has
given us different opportunities to triage, um, events and decide
which ones do we need to be at. And what's really clear is, as you've
said, that 7.5% has increased the priority and
required us to attend. So, we've made it really clear that we will still attend
where there is a risk to safety, property, people, um, where
there's a breach, uh, you know, a- a- a offense that's been
committed, um, or where there are concerns of safety.
So, we are still attending all of those events, but the ones that we're not
attending may be impacting on the decisions not to lay charges.
Previously, the biggest sort of reason why violent crime increased was an
increase in reporting of- of family violence or family
harm. Since there's been a change in some of the messaging
around police's involvement in family violence, we've also
seen a decrease in those violent crime
victimizations. Is there any concern within police that some of
your messaging around police's role in family violence, and your
attendance in general, might be contributing to a lower level of
people calling up and asking for help, and therefore a lower rate of
victimizations being reported?
N- no, I... No, is the answer to that from my perspective.
Um, two things. Yes, family harm demand
is- is one of our challenges. That's why we are looking
at various ways to ensure that we deploy to those that are
the highest risk, and the, um, RiskHarm Framework
is one of those initiatives. In fact, as Gill has said, it's actually allowed us to
attend more priority family harm, so we're directing effort to
the- the most critical events. The next step that I'm determined to do for
our organization is actually look at our reporting, because on average
police attend, um, scenes where there's been a family
harm situation, and we're there for over an hour
reporting on that particular situation, sometimes considerably
longer. And, um, there are a number of, uh, events
that we attend where, uh, we need to make
reporting for staff a little bit easier, a little bit quicker, because
actually, uh, jobs could otherwise be stacking up, waiting for
attendance. And I want to make sure that our reporting
practices are- are- are robust, but
that we're not spending too much time at events, because it may be getting in the
way of getting to the next call for help.
And so, there's a number of things there that what...
The intent behind what we're trying to do, whether it's the RiskHarm Framework or
it's the reporting, is to make sure that we- we can do as much as possible in the
time that we've got, with the resource we've got.
Commissioner, can
Has there, has
Can I assist you there, too? Um, it is, uh, really important to us,
uh, that even if we get early indicators of family harm where we're not
necessarily seeing evidence of a substan- a substantive offense,
that's why it's so critical that from the moment we get it, whether it be 10-5 or
triple one, we're then bridging through to tables like ISR and other
multi-agency tables across the country, to ensure that
there is a response, an appropriate response.
What it allows us to do, and this was the whole point of the change, is
that we can actually focus on areas that only we can focus
on. And that is doing the investigation and finding the evidence w- of a
substantive event, so that we can hold offenders to account.
Has there been any evaluation from the- this change on
victim safety, on repeat victimizations,
or even offender accountability, uh, as a result of that
RHA framework?
I don't know.
No, we'll have to come back to you on that, exactly.
So, you can't tell me whether you're going
to- We may... I can't tell you right now.
Right.
We'll have to come back to you on that one.
Can I just note that as a question?
Oh, I'm
sorry. Okay.
Family Violence. I'm just-
Yeah. ... interested in the, um, comment
that you see your core role as
investigating collating evidence
and holding people to account. There seemed to be a
significant shift from a strategy which was to
intervene to keep people safe, rather than being a kind of after the
event enforcement. Can you comment on that?
Yeah, yeah, sure, Doctor Web. Um, maybe let me recant that, so I'll speak a bit
longer. Um, uh, our- our role is
to reduce harm in communities. Um, part of
that is we always are looking for what is the total degree of
harm. In relation to family harm, for example, one of our- one
of our key functions is to ensure that when we get information, we are working
really closely and appropriately with other agencies, whether they be government,
community, NGOs. The role though that, um, no one else
can do, so maybe I should've said it's one of our core functions, is
when we go through a door, if we look...
Oranga Tamariki, their job is the welfare of the child and appropriate
placement. Our job though, and I'm happy to be challenged, that actually no one
else can do, is to get in there and actually be investigators, and
to look, uh, to- to really clearly establish what
has gone on there to get the facts of the case. So...
I accept that's your- that's the j- job that you can do that no one else can do-
Yeah.
... but equally, and I think it- it might just give your answer more
balance if you recognize, or just told us about the role you have
before harm occurs, to give those warnings-
Mm-hmm.
... um, and to monitor those family situations along with the rest of the ISR team.
Mm-hmm. Uh, well, Dr. Webb, if you remember, I mean it was actually placed with
Celine's agency that actually established ISR.
So, we actually are really clear on our role to reduce harm and work with
others.
Okay, we're going to Miss Paul, and then we're gonna come to you.
Cool. This is my last question. Thank you guys for your comprehensive answers-
I've got one
I'm coming to talk to us today. ... after this.
Um, I wanna circle back to the question I asked at the beginning, um, around the
discrepancies in the way that discretion is discharged-
Mm-hmm.
... for Maori and non-Maori.
How do you explain those discrepancies, if not systemic
racism?
Well, I mean, between myself and Gill, you know, we've said it's not as simple as
looking at stats. I'd like to be able to have a closer look at the circumstances of
each of those, um, events that police turn up to, and what
else comes with them. Um,
uh...... yeah, it's, it's quite a complex
set of, um, considerations-
Okay. So, we... you've-
... that we need to make.
... you've offered to re-
Come back
Come back with some more information.
... so let's do that in a meaningful way, rather than just on the
hoof.
Yeah.
Well, it's not on the hoof, m- Mr. Chair.
No, no, but, no, he doesn't-
I've been asking about this for a long
The commissioner's been clear, he doesn't have access to the information.
Let's get a informed decision. That's cool.
Yep.
Uh, Ms. Nagle?
Um, well, now I have two subs, if that's okay?
Yeah.
A sub directly to, to, um, to Ms. Paul's,
um, uh, question. Bodily samples, in what
situation are they take... In what situations are they
taken?
Uh-
Bodily samples. Is that... 'Cause I'm-
You-
Well, um, there's many different circumstances where
we may take a bodily sample. Um, often as part of an investigation,
DNA, in terms of the legislation that allows us to take a sample-
Yeah,
interesting. ... um, and be held in a database for comparison to other crime scenes and things
like that. There is... There, that's quite a broad, um,
topic, if you like, so,
um-
Yeah. So I'm seeing here, um, with your stats, that when it comes
to, uh... I think by law you have to categorize them
into, um, ch- uh, ethnicities. And I'm seeing that,
um, for example, uh, total number of
occasions on which DNA profiles derived from a bodily
sample, um, Maori,
2,759, European,
2,422. It's only about a 300 difference.
My example was actually about cannabis possession charges, not bodily samples.
Yeah, but I'm just... I think what we're getting at, is that
different things can show different things-
Yeah, that's-
... if people just want to look for that.
Yeah, and th- and the legislation says that the criteria is the same
for everybody. And the work that police does on collection of
bodily samples doesn't change based on ethnicity.
Yeah, so it doesn't seem like there's systemic, systemic racism there.
Um, the second, um, sub with respect to
harm and, um, social harm. When we were talking about youth
offending and youth, uh,
what w- what I've realized in Takanini, a lot of the times it's not just kids being
naughty kids.
Mm-hmm.
A lot of the times it's kids being too afraid to go home-
Yes.
... because there's a lot of abuse and drugs and what have you, taking o- taking
place at home. Is that something that you're aware of
as well? Or is it just a Takanini thing?
(laughs) I can probably talk to that one, having been the district commander of
Counties Manukau for six years. Um, the youth crime, it doesn't...
These children were victims long before they became offenders.
And the complexity which they arrive in the justice system has
been years of harm that has been caused to
them. Um, they've invariably got a lack of role models, a lack
of a father figure in the home. There's usually, um, housing
issues. They've dropped out of the education system.
Um, there will be health issues often.
And so, by the time they present in the justice system, the complexity of
what you're trying to undo and the harm that has been caused to those young
people is so huge. So, it is not, um, just a
Takanini problem-
Mm-hmm.
... um, but we see it evidenced across the country, of the harm that's been done to
our young people.
Okay, last question.
Thank you very much. Um, as part of the 2025 executive
restructure that was already discussed, you disestablished the, uh, deputy chief
executive of iwi and communities role.
Sure.
Can you see how that might, uh, be perceived by iwi
as walking away-
Yeah.
... or stepping back from the treaty partnership that police have with Maori?
Oh. Yes, um, but no, because that was never the intent.
Um, the... As I had said a number of times, our commitment
and partnership with Maori is a value that all police people subscribe
to, that the, um, executive, um, is determined
to, um, continue to work really hard at, in terms of
opportunities that, uh, uh, deliver outcomes for all communities,
including Maori. Um, it never, ever comes down to one
person in a role to deliver results.
Uh, we collectively own our values, we collectively own
initiatives and the determination to provide, um, services to all
communities. It should never, ever come down to one person.
But you do accept that there is a risk that there is a perception out
there-
Well,
look... Yeah. ... and, and that particularly in a group-
Yeah.
... where you have lower trust and confidence in those communities-
... can you see how that would be-
... perceived as-
Yeah, it should...
Yes. ... stepping away from that treaty relationship?
Yeah, and I've a- I've acknowledged that from the beginning.
He does
look- Uh, and I've, I've spoken to that. But, you know, I, I don't want to discount the
incredible work that happens across the country every da- every day at a, at a
whole different series of layers.
Uh, be it ILO, be it our civilian staff, be it
my commitment as commissioner, that our commitment is across the
board. And, and, and one of the, um, figures, if you like, that
we're most proud of is the 20% increase in Maori staff in policing over the
last five years. And that's a success story.
Okay. Now, we are going to finish at this point, because we've got the
minister joining us. Um,
so you might have to do a little bit of reorganization-
Yes.
... at your table.
Mm-hmm.
Does anyone want a break for a couple of minutes?
Yeah, I do.
All right, five, ten. We... Just while the minister waits, we're gonna just have
about a three-minute break, right?
Yeah.
So, everyone needs to be back-
Thank you.
... as, as soon as possible. Right, um, thank you.
Uh, before we start, I just want to acknowledge the, the minister for turning
up this afternoon.
Thank
you, Mr. Chair. The minister did not need to be here, but offered to come to the committee
on that request, uh, willingly accepted on behalf of the committee.
Thank
So, I just want to acknowledge you, minister, for turning up today.
I also just want to acknowledge, uh, the commissioner and his full
team today for being here. We've had a good line of questioning.
But the rest of this is 45 minutes for questions
directed at you, the minister. So, first one from the honorable Ginny
Andersen.
Oh, thank you very much-
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
... Minister. Uh, Minister, is there a problem with police culture?
No.
Um, so we've heard that also today from the commissioner, but the IPCA
is very clear that there is a wider problem with police
culture. Are you saying that the IPCA report is
incorrect?
Oh, no, I think it was a very good IPCA report.
It was very thorough and, um, and obviously, you know, we've
accepted the recommendations as the commissioner
has as well. But how can you accept the recommendation-
No, no,
... as well?
Let the, let the minister finish.
So if you let me finish-
We're not gonna do this.
If you let me finish. The culture and the problem with the culture, in my
view, sat
with some individuals in the previous police
executive. That is where the issue with the culture sat, and I'm
not gonna have our entire 15,000, um, non-sworn and sworn
members, um, tarred with the same brush.
The IPCA state, quote, "While police have made significant
advances towards a more positive culture since the Bazley inquiry,
our fan- findings graphically demonstrate that the settings in place to
protect and enhance integrity are still not sufficiently robust to
enable public to have confidence that police will do their job without
fear or favor." Is that comment, or is that finding by the
IPCA incorrect?
So, I think they highlight concerns that I brought in as the police minister
around, um, capability and delivery with the, um, with the
previous police executive. I think it highlights the fact that under
the new commissioner, um, there's been a fresh focus on
standards and integrity. That does matter.
I think that a, an organization as big as the police, um, or in fact any
organization, the police too, that's, uh, looking for constant
improvement. But I wanna highlight and say that I think our police force has
come a long way in the last 20 years, um, and I think that, um,
I think that's, uh, there's a lot to be proud of.
And I know that
all those other police officers, whether non-sworn or sworn, felt deeply
portrayed, uh, betrayed by the behavior that was exhibited
by that, um, previous police executive.
And we could all see, and the report rightly, um, highlights, that there was a
clear lack of moral compass and, and, or integrity.
We are very focused, both myself and the commissioner, on making
sure that the standards and integrity within the police are maintained at the
highest levels.
Can you see that there would be a level of public concern
that we have an IPCA inquiry stating there is a
problem with police culture, and we have a minister
and a commissioner both saying there is not a problem-
So I,
... with police culture?
... abso- absolutely I accept the fact that there is, there will be a high level of
public concern, and both the commissioner and I, and actually the
attorney general, um, when we initially addressed the
IPCA report, made it very clear that we're gonna do everything
humanly possible at, um, both the new police executive level
and government level to provide the confidence the public need that
this can't happen again. And, but the one thing that I have said is
that I've pleaded with the public to please have a look at this and
understand that it was a small group of individuals
at PNHQ that with the previous, um,
uh, police executive, and I highlight previous 'cause they have all
moved on. Um,
please don't judge the rest of our frontline sworn and
non-sworn people that turn up every day and do an outstanding
job. Um, we will deal with the issue that we have to deal
with. We will make sure that we do everything that we can to give the
public the sense that we are taking this seriously, and we're taking it...
It's deadly serious for us. Um, and, and, and give them the
sense that we're taking the actions that's required, that they can
maintain those same levels, very high levels, of public trust in our
police, and in fact, public trust that is growing in our police.
Do you accept that the inquiry into police use of different
sites that were prohibited on police devices was wider than
the executive?
Um, well, the, on the information that we have, obviously there's, um, the, the
inca- the commissioner has put the, um, guardrails back in place
around the use of police devices and, um, and
initiating investigation. Um, because he's doing
audits and they're doing audits to make sure that we have got a clear focus on
standards, and where they identify a departure from the values
of our New Zealand police, um, they will take action and that's what they're doing,
and that's what I expect them to do.
How is the, um, process underway for appointing deputy
commissioners different from that done in the past?
Oh, we've made some... Well, I paused, um, that process to make sure that we went
back and double-checked that, um, that PSC or the PSC
double-checked, um, you know, that all due diligence was done
properly and that every avenue was exhausted and that we didn't, um, we didn't
have a repeat of what has happened in the past.
Do you think there's a need for an independent inquiry into these
issues?
Not at the moment. I think that-
Okay.
... um, the, the IPCA report was very
thorough. Um, in fact, it was an outstanding report.
Um, it has given the police commissioner the information that he needs to continue
to do, uh, internal inquiries and work off the back of the
report. The report has informed the government in terms of what action we need
to take, and we've been very clear that we will be putting in place an
inspector general, um, that will sit over the top of the police and I think will
go a long way to providing the public with the comfort that they need to know
that, um, that a situation like this cannot be repeated again in our country.
Can I, can I just- ... potentially just add- Oh,
sorry. Commissioner? Mm-hmm. ... a comment in support is that to me, this, as the commissioner, this also goes
beyond the current, uh, deputy commissioner process in terms of the
robustness and thoroughness of the checks.
Um, I'm implementing the same standard of checks at both
assistant commissioner and d- district commander level as well.
I don't have to, but I will because it's critically important for our organization
that, uh, at all senior levels of policing, they're subjected to the
same checks and balances. And actually, I've taken it even one step further beyond
that. Um, and the IPCA report, it does talk about superintendent level and
above and the checks that would occur when, um, people at that
level are applying for jobs. Um, and I have advised,
uh, uh, all senior leadership that we're going to go and, uh, do tests
irrespective of whether they're applying for a job but superintendents, so
district commanders, directors, assistant commissioners, deputy commissioners,
me, uh, will be subjected to the same tests and,
um, exploratory work around use of the internet and
access to sites over the last 12 months. That starts with me.
Um-... and that, that work is underway.
We are prioritizing at the moment, but it'll... That work will continue into the...
early in the new year. That, that's the standard that all New Zealanders expect of
the leadership of New Zealand Police.
Right. Now, we've got a number of supplementaries, so Mr. Bates.
Thanks, Chair. Uh, thanks, Minister, for fronting up regarding this
today. What impact do you think the politicizing of
this report, um, by some members has created
in terms of morale and, uh, feeling
among the thousands of hardworking officers, um,
across the country?
Yeah, I, I don't think about the politics of it too much.
I think that, um,
uh, there were three people that...
uh, there are three groups that I was thinking about.
Um, one is the young lady that was involved in this.
Um, the other is our... is the, is members of the public, making sure that we
acted quickly so that we could give them a sense of confidence that we're dealing
with this. Um, and of course, the third group was our frontline
non-sworn and sworn members of police around the country, um, who
were, like I said to you, had a real sense of betrayal in terms of what had
happened and impacted them severely, which is really tough, um, when you
look at the work they're doing. Um, and it's quite simply, it's outstanding work,
serving every day for our country, tens of thousands of, um, positive acts
every day in the service of their communities.
They're making our country safer.
Um, and so this is a huge slap in the face for
them.
Right. Uh, Ms. Nacler?
Uh, uh, welcome, Minister. Minister, um-
Yeah.
... when did you become a minister again?
Minister, two years ago.
Two years ago?
Yeah.
So about 2000-
I thought that was a trick question there.
(laughs)
So, and Minister, do we know, um, is it correct that the
person in that senior role that, um, we're referring to was, um,
given that senior position in April of 2023 before you became
minister?
Yes, that is correct. Um-
Thanks,
Yes, that is correct. But again, uh, I don't want to, um, politicize
this because, um, I, I've been very clear that as the
incoming minister, I identified fairly early on that
I was dealing with a, um, with a police executive that had a
real issue and problem around, um, around
capability and around delivery, um,
and I started working with the PSC, um, to address those issues.
Thanks.
All right. I'm going to Ms. Paul.
Hello, Minister. Um-
Thank you.
... so just on the saying, you know, this is the, the former
police executive, how does that fit in with the
trend of under-reporting of sexual violence?
What has this got to you in terms of why people
choose not to report sexual violence?
Yeah, I... Look, I totally accept and acknowledge that, um,
that when we have a issue like this, a serious issue,
um, and that it involves a young lady,
um, then I could see how many women
would, um, would pause and think twice about coming
forward. And all that I can do is, is reassure them
that we have just got... and I, and I visited a couple of our, um, specialist teams
in the last fortnight, we have got the best, most trained
empathetic people in the police that will not only
listen to them, take their statements, um, put together a prosecution file, but
will lead them through that whole process, the court process, which is
extremely stressful, um, for, for any victim of crime, but
particularly a victim of crime of sexual assault.
Um, I think that, uh, that the person that's probably has got the loudest voice in
all of this is, um, Louise Nicholas.
And if you look at the comments that she made, um, obviously she condemned the
behavior, um, but she also highlighted how far
our police force has come and the outstanding people that we have in our service
that are specially trained to be able to deal with the victims of, um, sexual
offending.
And just on the report recommendations, um, will you be,
in addition to the, um, police inspector role that your government's
establishing, will you be increasing the power and
resource of the IPCA to investigate more of...
more complaints and to be able to direct police's
actions, discharge officers? How deep are you willing to invest in
accountability for the police?
Yes. Well, I mean, accountability is everything.
Um,
excuse me. And as I've said to you, the, the commissioner and,
um, his senior team have already shown clearly that they're taking
actions around audits, internal standards, and accountability.
You've already clearly seen the actions there.
Um, in terms of the IPCA, that will be part of the review that we're doing
right now in terms of forming that, um, Inspector-General's
office and how that will, um, interplay with the IPCA.
So, there will be new investment without a doubt going into that, um,
but we'll get advice in terms of what is the best structure going forward.
Right. I'm going to Mr. Stevenson.
Thank you. Especially for you, Commissioner.
Um, obviously there was a cultural issue in the last leadership team.
Can you just tell us as a committee how you operate as a leader with your
leadership team? How are you making sure that, uh, the
culture... that, yeah, basically people are being honest and direct with you within
your leadership team-
Yeah.
... are giving you... uh, are, are bringing issues to you, are challenging even
your thinking? I... Just tell us-
Yeah.
... about your style.
Yes. Look, it's a very good question.
Uh, I was, uh, amongst the leaders at assistant commissioner level, have been
since 2016. I, uh, have always just got on with my job and I
think that the IPCA report is one of the things that came as such a shock to me
because I absolutely knew nothing.
Uh, I was too busy, frankly, doing my j- doing my best for my country, uh,
alongside, um, many others. And, um, so it came as
a big shock and, and, uh, as the minister has said, you know, the caliber
of, uh, leader that we, um, need in our organization needs to be the
best. I am surrounded by very, very capable people, uh, very
competent, very talented, and, uh, my style of leadership is one where I
value the contributions of those around me.
Um, I don't always get it right, I make mistakes like all of us do.
Um, we will only be better if collectively we work, uh, hard together
and, and I've got some outstanding, uh, leaders, uh,
on the bench that are waiting to step up, and they will.
Uh, and I, and I'm very grateful for what they do alongside me in what is a tough
job.
Thank you.
Any more? back to, uh, Honorable Ginny,
uh, Anderson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Minister, have you, uh,
considered the appointment of a non-constabulary deputy
commissioner, uh, as was done after the Basley report
with, uh, Lynn Provo?
I'm not gonna... That, that process is underway at the moment, so I'm not gonna
talk to, um, that process. You'll, you'll have to wait for the announcement on
that.
Could you see that, um, it might assist in transparency?
One of the, um, terms used by the commissioner is that groupthink
had developed. By having someone external who is non-constabulary, do you
think that that would provide a mechanism to prevent that problem occurring in
the future?
Look, I think that there's, um, there's a range of people up in PNHQ and, um,
and, uh, some of them aren't sworn members of police, and I think that they
bring a different perspective, um, which is important, um,
to the overall, um, you know, values, um,
and, uh, and, and police culture, um, without a doubt up at
PNHQ. Um, but I'm not gonna talk to the appointments that we're currently
going through. You'll have to wait until, um, until we make that announcement.
The IPCA-
Can I, can I just add one point though, if you may?
Sorry.
Um, I do have Andrea Conlan, who's my tier two, uh, chief
operating officer, who's an outstanding leader for our organization as a civilian
member. Um, her contribution and, and, and to, to, to
what we do is as important as any other constabulary member, uh, at that same
level. So I do have someone who I have tremendous trust and confidence, and who
does a great job. Um, you, you talk about the former Lynn Provo
Under the Policing Act, uh, it's pretty clear that a deputy... Uh, you can't...
Uh, a civilian member cannot hold the rank of, um, deputy commissioner
now unless we seek a legislation change.
And frankly, it shouldn't come down to that.
It should come down to the pal- caliber of person and the contribution they make,
and I'm very lucky to have Andrea in the team.
Do the-
And I, I... Just really quickly, an external perspective is really important, and
that's exactly what the general, the inspector general will bring as well.
Do the non-constabulary members of the executive have any oversight over
operational police matters from a day-to-day?
Uh, we, we, yeah, we operate as a team.
We always have, we always will under my leadership.
You know, when we sit round at 8:00 in the morning, the, the contribution I get
from my civilian colleagues is as important as the contribution I get from my
constabulary members. Um, we, we are a very,
um, uh, focused team that understands the priority,
priorities and that's not gonna change.
But the, their responsibilities would be in corporate functions and HR functions,
as opposed to-
Oh, certainly, yes. We've o-
... investigative oversight such as-
Oh, absolutely. We've all, we've all got strengths and weaknesses, um, based on
our, uh, our skills, knowledge and experience in our careers.
Um, but the contribution that we all make to, to arrive at a place where we
need to do the right thing as, as leaders of the organization is just as important
as the others.
The IPCA stressed that the integrity system within police must
be viewed as a whole, and it stated that aspects of the culture that
undermine that system must be addressed at all levels.
What, what specific actions going forward, Minister, will you
be overseeing to ensure that those particular things
are, are improved?
Well, from a government s- perspective, if I go back to sort of where
we started two years ago, um,
we immediately highlighted the fact that, um, because I'd sat
exactly where you were, um, challenging the then executive
around standards, and, um, the fact that I had felt very strongly there was
a drop in standards and that shouldn't be happening.
So there was a big focus on standards.
Um, I supported the reinstating the training,
um, course at the Police College from 16 weeks to 20
weeks. There was lots of anecdotal feedback from the front line to say
that, um, to g- it wasn't fair on the recruits to be putting them through a
16-week course. They should have 20 weeks and you'd get a better trained, a
better prepared, um, police officer when they graduated and were
deployed out to their home stations.
So, I immediately extended that to 20 weeks.
Um, that was the right thing to do. Um, the appointment
of, uh, the new commissioner, uh, with a focus
again on standards and integrity.
And, um, and we are working through and we still have work to do,
uh, but that is what our focus is. And, um, and you'll
consi- continue to see audits and you'll continue to see,
um... I think the commissioner's been just around the, around the whole country
talking with leadership teams and, um, and reinforcing that
message. From a government perspective, we'll continue to support him, uh, in being
able to do that.
Can you see from a public perspective when I'm asking about what are the meaningful
differences you've made to change culture and you say, "Extending the number of
weeks at Police College and appointing a new commissioner."
Standards and integrity. So, th- they had gone missing.
Not all areas, but in some areas, in some critical areas.
What particular areas?
Standards and integrity. Well, the previous police executive
had a serious lack of standards and integrity, so
we are addressing those. Um, I'm not going to, like I
said to you, if you're asking me to condemn our
15,000 police officers, sworn and
non-sworn staff around the country, and judge them by the
same standards of that previous police executive, I am not gonna
do that. Um, I am gonna support the commissioner in
making sure that we have got a focus that is driven right down through the
organization, that's his responsibility, um, as commissioner,
that there is a focus on standards and integrity.
And I'd remind you in the IPCA report that we
had four very senior officers that, um, that held onto
those values and those standards and showed the bravery and the integrity
that is reflective, I believe, a lot more reflective
of the majority of our 15,000 sworn and non-sworn staff around the
country.
Just-
There's a couple of other things too. Can I just add? Uh, I've got a big...
Like to just say some of the things that we have done. Um-...
over the last few months, um, actually before the IPCA report came out.
Because of what the Minister speaks to around a drop in standards and
expectations, we introduced, we did a rapid review, we looked
at, um,
areas where auditing processes weren't what they should be.
Uh, we've introduced that. Sure, we found some other things to think about, but you
know, we have implemented those. Uh, that's been the right thing to do.
I have provided an uplift in resources to the National Integrity
Unit that do a lot of this work for us.
They've, I said, "I don't want any more bosses.
I want practitioners who investigate things." Um, grassroots, very
capable, uh, investigators. So we've provided an uplift to help deal
with the demand under the leadership of Detective Superintendent Kylie Shah, who's
an exceptional leader. Uh, and also I've invited the Public Service Commission to
come in and have a closer look and see whatever else it is that they can, uh,
identify as opportunities for us to ensure that, um, my
organization is the best that it possibly can be and that this never happens again.
So we've done a lot of things. Those are just a sample of a number of things.
We have a lot more on the work plan-
Mm-hmm.
... but, um, it's all, it's all done with the intent of ensuring that we-
Uh, when was this one?
... raise expectations.
Uh, Minister, is it your expectation that should be changes to disclosures and
conflict of interest processed when applying for roles internally in light of the
IPCA report?
Well, uh, the commissioner just earlier on, um, has already commented on that.
He's already made those changes.
Uh, they're being implemented?
Okay.
The, the-
Where, well just to be clear, uh, uh, is about to be implemented or
been implemented?
Uh, the expectation on individuals going for senior leadership roles has not
changed. People, if they've got something to say, they need to say it.
They should. It's one of the, one of the mandatory questions that always gets asked in
appointments process is-
Sure. ... is there anything that you would like to tell us?
Okay.
Um, what happened in the, in the IPCA matter is that that did not
happen. And I'm-
All right. Thank you for the clarification. I'm going to Mr. Rutherford.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Minister, since you've been the Minister of Police,
uh, for just over two years, is New Zealand a safer place under your
leadership?
Um, I think that, um, because of our frontline police
officers and their, and the layers of leadership that they have, right up to the
people sitting be- behind me and the, and the commissioner sitting
beside me, they're the ones responsible for, um, for without a doubt
making our country safer. Um, all of the,
um, all of the stats that we measure, um, our
country's safety by, uh, are heading in the right direction, um, but
there's a lot more work to do. Um, so yeah, I just want to
acknowledge, um, our, our entire police force 'cause they are the ones
responsible for that.
Yeah, 38,000 fewer victims of serious violent crime, 15%
reduction in serious youth offending, uh, successful
implementation of the gang patch ban across the country, which has had, resulted
in, um, very positive results in the community.
Um, obviously, uh, things that are heading in the right direction.
What else would you like to see take place?
Oh, (laughs) we just wanna see, like, um, we're not, we're not, we can't wave the
victory flag yet. Um, yes, we're heading in the right direction, but there's
still a long way to go.
Mm-hmm.
There's still a lot more work to do.
Um, you know, a big part of it obviously is leadership, um, in the police
it's, um, focus and direction, um, it's
resourcing, um, it was back to basics, highly
visible. It's been extremely successful, um, and, uh, we just
want to keep building on that success.
One of the big hallmarks of the last 12 months has been the gang patch
ban. Can you tell us more about the rollout of that-
The, the g- ... and the effects you've seen it have on communities?
Yeah, so primarily the, so the, the gang patch legislation that,
um, that we developed an opposition and brought
forward, that's, it's been very
effective. Um, primarily that was designed,
um,
in my view, uh, in the previous three or four, five, six years,
gangs had acted with impunity. They were taking over
provincial towns, literally taking over provincial towns.
The schools were being shut, where members of the pu- public
and the communities couldn't use their roads, um,
where there was drive, multiple drive-by shootings and firearm-related, um, gang
violence, where you had gang members out, um, in a show of force with
their patches driving into oncoming traffic, abusing,
intimidating members of the public, and we saw stories like that just about every
week. Um, and so the gang legislation was a really effective
tool in allowing the police to really roll back up over the top and do some
really great, um, law enforcement work, um, and it has worked
without a doubt. Um, you know, the gang patch ban's been very effective
in terms of removing those patches from our streets and they're on the streets for
only one reason, that is to quite simply intimidate and scare the people in the
community that they're operating in.
Um, the ga- the police still know who the gangs are
and their level of enforcement is extraordinary.
Um, every week I'm getting reports.
I was up with the gang, um, disruption unit in Auckland last week.
Um, huge acknowledgement to them and their colleagues around the country,
backed up by our specialist teams.
Without a doubt, I think the public have got a sense that our police officers are
controlling the streets and not the gangs, um, and
that work is gonna continue and it's gonna continue to gather momentum,
um, and it has been extremely effective in terms of
public safety because gang members are disproportionately responsible for a
lot of the violent offending that we see in this country.
And just final supplementary, as the Minister of Police, why was it important for
you to have a refresh of the police executive leadership
team?
Uh, well, (laughs) it was-
You get tough questions on this side.
Yeah. (laughs) It was, it was a, a lot, it's no secret, um, that, uh,
you know,
this and the incoming government had a very different set of priorities, um, and
focus and view on public safety. And,
um, and like I said to you, uh, the, the previous police
executive for me as the incoming minister, um, I
identified fairly early on that there were, um, capability and delivery, um,
issues. Um, and you can't have that, um, at that level.
So, that was something that I was engaged with through the PSC.
Uh, sadly, with the, um, release of the IPCA report, it was
obvious that there was integrity issues sitting in there as well.
All right, I'm gonna turn to Ms. Nagle.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Minister, I touched on this earlier
with, um, our excellent commissioner, uh, applications to
join the police have increased in the, um, the year,
um, since the last annual review from, uh...
by about 3,500 from just over 5,000
to almost 9,000. What do you attribute that
to?
Um, well, I think-
That'll call him.
... policing... Well, poli... What was that?
Joblessness.
Oh, do you think so?
More people off the job.
Joblessness, yeah.
(laughs)
I, I, I put it down-
That'll be you soon.
I put it, I put it down to, um-
Okay.
I put it down to the fact that, um, policing is just an outstanding
profession. Um,
in my view, it's one of the best ways that you can engage in public service.
Um, and I think a lot of people see that and they want to join the
organization. I think their recruiting is, um, has been very
effective. Um, I know that we've got...
and I want to acknowledge the team, uh, the policing team that have been working
very hard to deliver on our 500 f- um, new police
officers. I would say that, um-
Safety.
... that although that 500 number's important, uh, the focus has
been on standards.
Yeah.
Uh, not rushing
to the 500. We'll get there. Um, to be honest with you, if we, if
we wanted to get that 500, um, in November, then we wouldn't have
extended the police training course from 16 to 20 weeks.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but we had a clear focus that came back on, um, standards and I think that's
important.
Think so.
And I... in an agency like the police, um, standards matter.
And the minute you start to depart from them, then you start dealing with a whole
lot of, um, issues.
Right. Quick sub here. Mr. Bates, and then coming down.
Minister, why do you think it's so hard for people, uh, to
appreciate the decision that you've just explained
that you made, that you prioritized
ensuring the training was right
over meeting a self-determined deadline?
Because look at the history-
Is that what you're saying?
... of our police force. I mean, uh, you know, there's a long
history and legacy there, um, that we should be extremely proud of.
I am personally. Um, and I think that,
um, the, the reason why we have such a long and proud history
is because there's a main... there's an adherence to standards, um, and the
maintenance of those standards and those values.
And, um, so that's why I personally felt very strongly that there should
be not... should not be a departure from those.
And like I said to you, I sit right where, um, where, you know,
Honorable Ginny Andersen's sitting right now, um, challenging
the police executive, uh, around a drop of standards.
Did not think that was acceptable. We've changed that.
There's a big focus on standards and integrity.
Right. We're going to Honorable Ginny Andersen.
Thank you. Uh, Minister, when will the 500 new police be delivered?
Uh, they'll be delivered when, um-
(laughs)
They'll be, they'll be delivered when we have recruited
500 police officers that meet the standards and the high qualities that we
expect in the New Zealand police, and they've gone through their
20-week training course and they'll have been deployed out to their
stations.
You've given numerous dates in the past. Why do you stop now?
Um, well, we, we said we had a coalition date, um,
of November. Uh, that was, uh, an aspirational
date. It was the... the fact of the matter is, had we kept the...
had we kept the, um, recruit training course to 16 weeks,
we probably would have met that date. We probably would have hit it.
But I wasn't willing to do what the previous government did, and that is
not increase the course, not have a focus on integrity and
standards, and then end up with the position that I ended up in, is
inheriting, um, all those issues that were allowed to ferment and grow.
Um, that's why we pushed it out to 20 weeks.
We had to pause all recruit courses through the college for
three months while we reset the curriculum back to 20
weeks. If I wanted to hit November, we probably could have hit
November, but it would have been at the expense of standards and I wasn't willing
to do that.
The funding in place previously enabled for police to population
ratio to be one police officer to every 480
New Zealanders. That's now changed under your government to one police
officer to 510 New Zealanders. Uh, do you
have a view of, of whether you'll try and restore
that?
Well, my view is that we came into government, you're already 200 down
and, um, and with the police force that we've got, uh, they are making
our country safer.
That's
right. They are more visible. Um, they're hitting the gangs.
They are reducing, um, violent youth
offending. On every metric, they are just quite simply being
outstanding-
The one-
... on the numbers that they've got.
The one interesting or one key metric in, in your police annual,
uh, report, uh, shows that, that the pol- that public
perception of police responding to serious crime has
decreased over the past couple of years.
Do you think that there's a correlation with that decrease and
also the decrease in the police to population
ratio under your watch?
Well, I, I, I know that there had been a decline,
um, in public confidence in the police prior to the
change of government, but I know that the good news is that there is now an
increase in public confidence in our police.
If you're focused on increasing police visibility, why do you have
no plan to restore the 1:480 ratio that was
previously in place?
Well, you can talk to the 1:480 ratio.
What I'm saying to you is that the ratio and the police officers that we're
doing... that we've got at the moment are quite simply doing an outstanding job.
They... we, we had less police officers than under the previous government and
we're delivering better results.
Can I, can
I- Uh, the auditor... Sorry.
Sorry. Can I just add one, I think, an important other factor here is, particularly
when you talk about the 500. The, the pipeline out...
... is as critically important as the pipeline into the organization, and we've
heard the figures about how well that's going.
Uh, the other end, um, we've dealt with quite a high attrition rate over some
years. Um, but right now it's sitting at 4.8%, which is the
lowest it's been in a long time. And, and I know that's
because people are feeling a lot better about policing now.
Um, they're keen to stay. Um, we see the numbers coming back from
Australia. Um, so people are feeling across the board good about
policing here in New Zealand. The public support, the government support, the
leadership. And, and I think that's a really important factor to also help out, get
to where we need to get to, but without dropping standards.
Uh, the Auditor General and Treasury both found that corporate functions
within police were not up to standard.
Do you think the reduction of $19.6 million over four
years in the corporate support functions, uh, and primary response
management contribute towards this failed tar- target?
Well, I mean, it was right across government we had to, um,
that we had to reprioritize. And it was very clear that we were reprioritizing to
the frontline where public services are delivered.
Um, we were living, as a country, we were living well beyond our means,
and, um, that's not sustainable.
Trea- Treasury-
So, so we're, so we, we are, as a, as a government, we are correcting that.
That is hard. Um, but, and there's some tough choices that had to be made.
But I have to say that I've been very proud at how our public
service and our agencies have responded to that.
And you can actually see
across most sectors now, most agencies, that, um, service to the public's
improving and, and results are improving.
Trea- Especially, especially with police.
Treasury found that funding had been taken out of core
functions such as asset management and corporate services
and redirected to the frontline, to the point where those fundamental parts
of police were not operating properly.
Do you have a view to want to rectify that or you're happy for that to continue?
Well, they're outstanding. I mean, uh, yes, there's been,
They're outstanding? Corporate services are outstanding, are you saying?
Absolutely. Uh, the, the... Look, in my view as minister, um, the
performance, you talk about property services, they've got a very good plan.
You gotta remember-
You read the report.
You gotta, you gotta remember that when I became minister, I don't l- I know you
don't like hearing this. Um, the police were about a week away from going
broke, breaching their appropriation. And do you know why?
Still don't.
Because their core services had not been funded properly.
We immediately put $120 million into
support, into actually making sure that those core services were
funded. That was meant to be a one-off.
That $120 million is there to stay.
Okay, yeah. I've got a question here from Mr. Bates.
Thanks, Chair. Minister, I just want to go back to the
1:480 ratio.
Can you just help me understand? Was that fully funded by the
previous government on an ongoing basis or was that funded
just in the 2017 budget and then
left?
We're... So, poli- police were going broke when I come, when I took over as
minister, I was briefed-
When?
One of my first briefings was, um, we, uh, th- uh, "In about a week, we'll breach
our appro- appropriation." Which means they were going broke.
Yeah,
The way they were saving money is they weren't recruiting.
Um, because, you know, 70% of, um, police's expenses are,
um, are personnel. Um, so that was
the situation that we were presented with. So we had to stabilize immediately.
Um, and obviously get the recruitment program, um, back up and running at the
college. We extended out to, um, 20 weeks.
And, um, and like I said, I'm confident that we'll deliver those, um, 500
additional police officers this term.
Right. Now, going to a new line of questioning, I think from Ms. Paul.
Yeah. On, uh, road safety. Um, so you've
reiterated over and over again standards and integrity, and we've got
30,000 alcohol breath tests that have been-
Yeah.
... falsely or erroneously recorded.
I'm keen t- for you to share your thoughts on that-
Yeah.
... and what you're doing to remedy the situation.
But I'm also keen to understand with the pilot rolling out for roadside drug
testing in Wellington-
Yeah.
... later this month, what needs to happen in the pilot
for you to, um, deem it a success or a
failure?
Yeah. Okay. So the first one is, um, really disappointing,
obviously. Uh, but that was discovered
because, um, the police are auditing themselves and going through and
actually checking, making sure they're doing health checks exactly in terms
of, um, what has been delivered and how our frontline police officer
del- delivered it. So it was a good thing it was picked up.
Now it's a, uh, employment process that, um, that the police will work through
on that. In terms of, um, roadside, um, drug
testing, yes, the pilot, uh, kicks off in December here in
Wellington. It'll be expanded nationally, should be by the middle of
next year, June, July, uh, next year.
And quite simply the reason for it is, is because I think 30%
of, um, of road fatalities, uh, involve
drugs.
Mm.
Um, so it's obviously gonna make our roads
safer. I don't think, um, Kiwis want to share the roads with people that are under
the influence of THC or, or methamphetamine or,
or, um, MDMA or cocaine.
Yeah. And I fully agree with you on that-
Yeah.
Nobody should ever drive impaired.
I guess the, the, the thing I'm wondering about is an alcohol breath test is
far simpler than a-
Yeah, it is.
... saliva-based testing-
Yeah. ... for four different drugs.
Yeah.
So how... Yeah, what training are you gonna put in place?
I know every police officer now has to undergo breath testing training again.
Yeah.
But how are you gonna make sure this more complex test...
And if your pilot comes back and shows a high number of incorrect
tests, will that make you go back to the drawing board?
Yeah, I think if that... I'll, I'll hand over to the commissioner 'cause that's
largely operational, the question that you've asked.
But, um-
He has given me his answer earlier though,
Oh, yeah. It's okay,
yeah. ... happy to just take yours
(laughs)
Yeah, well (laughs) go ahead.
Unless he wants to add anything new, but-
It is, it is... It's just that three-quarters of that question's operational.
I just, from the, from the testing side of it, the pilot, obviously the feedback,
if we get the feedback and there's issues around that, then we're just gonna have
to look at that and make sure that we've... yeah.
We make the changes.
That's helpful. Thank you.
Yeah.
All right. We're coming near to the end.
So any more questions?
Always got one. (laughs)
All right. Couple more from you.
Um, Minister, there's been an increase in gang membership of about
800 over the past, I think it's just over 18
months. Um, are you concerned that the number of gang members
might be higher than the number of police officers in the near future?
I'm, I'm not concerned at all about the way our police are,
um, uh, policing gangs. I think they're just, quite
simply they're dominating the gangs.
Um, being a gang member in New Zealand now is a pretty miserable
occupation. I think that, um, yes, the police will continue to use the
gang list as a tool, um, to be, to be able to
monitor. Um, the number will go up and down a bit.
I noticed that, um, that without a doubt the number of people going on
to the, that gang register has reduced significantly.
Um-
So, no, the, there's 800 more, you know that don't
Yeah, but it's, but under the, I'd have to go back and check the numbers if it was
under the pre, your lot it would probably be more like 2,000.
It was going up, um-
I think it's 8,000.
She's making that up aren't you?
Well go, well go back and check it.
Free styling it.
I don't have the numbers but-
No, you clearly don't.
... but I, but I know-
Don't need them.
... but I can tell you this for sure,
the number of people going on to the gang register has reduced, has slowed
down. Um, without a doubt. I'm sorry guys, but you're just gonna have
to face the reality that the gangs under the previous government,
um, got away with blue murder. They, they took over the
streets.
There was a, so-
They intimidated people. The violence, it was, you know,
for us, for New Zealand it was totally unacceptable.
So, over a 12-month period-
You
guys took your eyes off the ball big time. ... we saw a 97% increase in methamphetamine
manufacture-
Yep, so we got a meth
plan, we got a meth plan on that. ... and consumption in New Zealand and we've also heard, um, from, from
your own senior detectives that gangs are making
double the profits from methamphetamine during the time of that gang
patch ban. Do, do you see that there would be a perception that it
would be largely superficial if people don't see them but they're still just making
record profits behind the scenes?
Well, methamphetamine is insidious as a drug,
um, I remember clearly when we first started seeing meth on the
streets. Um, yes, it's for organized crime,
transnational organized crime. It's a big source of revenue, um,
and that is why we've just announced our, our meth plan to start to
deal with it and really start to, um, hook into it.
It's, it's, the increase hasn't showed up.
We've been waiting for it to show up.
It hasn't really showed up in the health system.
Um, it hasn't really showed up with policing, in terms of a big
increase in meth-related, um, violence or, or crime.
Um, so, you know, it's only a, um, it's only a theory but the
theory is that, um, that those that are using meth are using more of
it, uh, because of course it's got to pass through the body to be detected in the,
um, in the wastewater testing. But the fact of the matter is we've got a meth
problem in New Zealand, there's no doubt about that.
We have for a long time, it's been increasing for a long time and we're really
committed to making sure that we do the work that we need to do to get, to start
shutting that down.
Do you think the gang patch ban has had any material difference on the
amount of money and assets and profits
that organized criminal groups are able to, uh,
accumulate in New Zealand?
I think the gang patch ban has been extremely effective for
the police to, um, to start to have another tool to deal
with gangs. And like I said to you, the gangs are
disproportionately responsible for the level of, uh, violent
offending in this country. We all know that they're the ones that are
running, um, the transnational crime and the, and the drugs, as you've just
highlighted. Has the gang patch ban and the gang legislation that we
brought in been effective? All the feedback that I get from the front
line
and, uh, that, so the people that are actually using it, the people that are out
there dealing with the gangs, is that it's been highly effective.
Right, I am going to give the last question to Miss
Knightley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, following on from that, speaking of tools,
um,
I too am hearing from a lot of the police, um, excellent police people
that the gang patch, um, law is helping them a lot.
So, with the recent figures that my colleague mentioned earlier, um, that we've
smashed the target that we had with respect to reducing the number
of victims of violent crime, um, re- reduced now
by 38,000, would you say Minister and Commissioner that
passing laws like these, giving police the extra
tools to deal with, um, disgusting behavior
helps that ultimate goal of reducing victims, the number of
victims?
Yeah, I do. I just want to say there, there's two sides to this.
One, with policing you kind of got, got to go right at the problem and you've got
to deal with it and that's, that's what the police are doing.
Um, the other side of it that's not always vili- visible but they're actually
highly effective is identifying the families that need support and
help. Um, because you want to break that, especially that
intergenerational, the family sort of, um, situation where the
kids are growing, are born into an environment where they're probably on a fast
track into the youth justice system and, and then into the adult, um,
justice system. So, um, yes, without a doubt it's been very effective
in, in reducing the amount of victimizations. We're gonna keep doing that.
Um, but the other piece of work that's got to happen alongside of that is,
um, is the social side of it. Getting in and helping these families and, uh, making
sure they get the support they need.
And yes, likewise from me. I constantly hear from staff across the
country that the new legislation has empowered them to do their
jobs. Uh, they love it, uh, and it's translating
into results that communities value and that is, uh, feelings of
safety. And that's a positive.
Thank you.
Right, um, just I'd like to say on behalf of the
Justice Select Committee, thank you to all the police and, uh,
particularly you Commissioner for three hours of intense questioning.
I, I just want to recognize all the senior leaders in the
police. You operate in a very difficult environment.
You're doing a great thing for New Zealand and I want to thank you Commissioner
and your team. I also just want to acknowledge the Minister for
volunteering to turn up this afternoon and answering the question,
questions in an open manner. I thank you also.
So thank you everyone, it's been a very helpful session
and I think New Zealand's better for it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, thank
you. Thank you.
See you later.
(crosstalk)